_pages/about.md, before:

---
layout: single
title: About
permalink: /about/
author_profile: true
header:
  image: /images/banff.jpeg
---

I was born in Toronto, spent the first 5 years of my life outside of Halifax and then my family
moved to Chapel Hill, North Carolina. Growing up in North Carolina I was quite devoted to my studies, participating in state-wide math and science competions as well as Battle of the Books. As a high school senior I was a recepient of Microsoft's You can Make A Difference international scholarship program as well as the country wide Apple Scholars program. I dedicated a lot of my time
to helping the community and served as secretart and president of my local Key Club, eventually serving as the webmaster for the North and South Carolina Key Club. 


# Education

As I have always been fascinated with computers I decided I wanted to major in Computer Science, which led me to Cleveland, Ohio as I attended [Case Western Reserve University](http://case.edu/). During my freshmen year I realized that computer science can be applied to almost every discipline, thus I began also studying economics. My sophmore year led me to dive deeper into biology, eventually leading to me concentrating in bioinformatics and computational biology. Beginning the summer after my sophomore year, I joined a research team attempting to discover proteins that affected tumor growth, and this led me to understand and apply graph theory to solve this problem. My resulting predictions were then validated using mRNAi study data. At the same time I was working as the primary web developer for the School of Arts & Sciences, and worked on creating the Drupal CMS that is now ubiquitous at Case. 

Unfortantely I suffered serious injuries the summer before my senior year that left me paralyzed from the waist down, but that did not stop physically and mentally! I spent the next few years enduring vigorous physical therapy, leading me to Orlando, San Diego and Tampa. During this period I continued my learning via MOOCs such as Coursera where I obtained over 20 certifications, eventually enrolling in [Thinkful's Data Science Program](https://www.thinkful.com/bootcamp/data-science/flexible/). This was a 6-month program experimenting with analytics using the Python coding language along with Supervised and Unsupervised Machine Learning models with a specialization in Deep Learning using TensorFlow and Keras.


# Interests
I am very interested in nature, particularly the northwest like Banff, Salt Lake City, Moab and Yosemite. Being born in Toronto I am natually a big Toronto Maple Leafs fan (our time is coming!). Quantitative trading also fascinates me; I dabbled in this field for a little over a year and quickly learned that it is very promising! I find enjoyment in finding the needle in a haystack; untangling a giant mess of data to disover something meaningful. Whether this be sensitive health data (breast cancer) or State Of the Union addresses, data science can assist in detecting subtle variations.

Commit message:

Changed header overlay images
Former-commit-id: 0d5fe231c183d9e6ff808ae61ecb974678046aab

_pages/about.md, after:

---
layout: single
title: About
permalink: /about/
author_profile: true
header:
  overlay_image: /images/riverwalk.jpeg
  overlay_filter: 0.5 # same as adding an opacity of 0.5 to a black background
---

I was born in Toronto, spent the first 5 years of my life outside of Halifax and then my family
moved to Chapel Hill, North Carolina. Growing up in North Carolina I was quite devoted to my studies, participating in state-wide math and science competions as well as Battle of the Books. As a high school senior I was a recepient of Microsoft's You can Make A Difference international scholarship program as well as the country wide Apple Scholars program. I dedicated a lot of my time
to helping the community and served as secretart and president of my local Key Club, eventually serving as the webmaster for the North and South Carolina Key Club. 


# Education

As I have always been fascinated with computers I decided I wanted to major in Computer Science, which led me to Cleveland, Ohio as I attended [Case Western Reserve University](http://case.edu/). During my freshmen year I realized that computer science can be applied to almost every discipline, thus I began also studying economics. My sophmore year led me to dive deeper into biology, eventually leading to me concentrating in bioinformatics and computational biology. Beginning the summer after my sophomore year, I joined a research team attempting to discover proteins that affected tumor growth, and this led me to understand and apply graph theory to solve this problem. My resulting predictions were then validated using mRNAi study data. At the same time I was working as the primary web developer for the School of Arts & Sciences, and worked on creating the Drupal CMS that is now ubiquitous at Case. 

Unfortantely I suffered serious injuries the summer before my senior year that left me paralyzed from the waist down, but that did not stop physically and mentally! I spent the next few years enduring vigorous physical therapy, leading me to Orlando, San Diego and Tampa. During this period I continued my learning via MOOCs such as Coursera where I obtained over 20 certifications, eventually enrolling in [Thinkful's Data Science Program](https://www.thinkful.com/bootcamp/data-science/flexible/). This was a 6-month program experimenting with analytics using the Python coding language along with Supervised and Unsupervised Machine Learning models with a specialization in Deep Learning using TensorFlow and Keras.


# Interests
I am very interested in nature, particularly the northwest like Banff, Salt Lake City, Moab and Yosemite. Being born in Toronto I am natually a big Toronto Maple Leafs fan (our time is coming!). Quantitative trading also fascinates me; I dabbled in this field for a little over a year and quickly learned that it is very promising! I find enjoyment in finding the needle in a haystack; untangling a giant mess of data to disover something meaningful. Whether this be sensitive health data (breast cancer) or State Of the Union addresses, data science can assist in detecting subtle variations.
