_pages/home.md, before:

---
layout: splash
permalink: /
header:
  overlay_color: "#5e616c"
  overlay_image: mm-home-page-feature.jpg
  caption:
excerpt: "Analysis of increasingly complex algorithmic problems, using a modern programming language and a variety of approaches. Problem decomposition and abstraction guide explorations of topics from applied algorithms, for example Voronoi Diagrams, Markov Chains, Bin Packing, and Graph Search."
feature_row:
  - image_path: mm-customizable-feature.png
    alt: "customizable"
    title: "Super Customizable"
    excerpt: "Everything from the menus, sidebars, comments, and more can be configured or set with YAML Front Matter."
    url: "/docs/configuration/"
    btn_label: "Learn More"
  - image_path: mm-responsive-feature.png
    alt: "fully responsive"
    title: "Responsive Layouts"
    excerpt: "Built on HTML5 + CSS3. All layouts are fully responsive with helpers to augment your content."
    url: "/docs/layouts/"
    btn_label: "Learn More"
  - image_path: mm-free-feature.png
    alt: "100% free"
    title: "100% Free"
    excerpt: "Free to use however you want under the MIT License. Clone it, fork it, customize it, whatever!"
    url: "/docs/license/"
    btn_label: "Learn More"
github:
  - excerpt: '{::nomarkdown}<iframe style="display: inline-block;" src="https://ghbtns.com/github-btn.html?user=mmistakes&repo=minimal-mistakes&type=star&count=true&size=large" frameborder="0" scrolling="0" width="160px" height="30px"></iframe> <iframe style="display: inline-block;" src="https://ghbtns.com/github-btn.html?user=mmistakes&repo=minimal-mistakes&type=fork&count=true&size=large" frameborder="0" scrolling="0" width="158px" height="30px"></iframe>{:/nomarkdown}'
---

{% include feature_row %}

<h1>{{ site.data.ui-text[site.locale].schedule | default: "SCHEDULE" }}</h1>

{% for post in site.posts %}
{% include archive-single.html %}
{% endfor %}

Commit message:

Changed navigation to include only about and the schedule. Added another feature row. Removed the author profile from the pages. Can now see when schedule is updated.

_pages/home.md, after:

---
layout: splash
permalink: /
header:
  overlay_color: "#5e616c"
  overlay_image: mm-home-page-feature.jpg
  caption:
excerpt: "Analysis of increasingly complex algorithmic problems, using a modern programming language and a variety of approaches. Problem decomposition and abstraction guide explorations of topics from applied algorithms, for example Voronoi Diagrams, Markov Chains, Bin Packing, and Graph Search."
feature_row:
  - image_path: mm-customizable-feature.png
    alt: "customizable"
    title: "Super Customizable"
    excerpt: "Everything from the menus, sidebars, comments, and more can be configured or set with YAML Front Matter."
    url: "/docs/configuration/"
    btn_label: "Learn More"
  - image_path: mm-responsive-feature.png
    alt: "fully responsive"
    title: "Responsive Layouts"
    excerpt: "Built on HTML5 + CSS3. All layouts are fully responsive with helpers to augment your content."
    url: "/docs/layouts/"
    btn_label: "Learn More"
  - image_path: mm-free-feature.png
    alt: "100% free"
    title: "100% Free"
    excerpt: "Free to use however you want under the MIT License. Clone it, fork it, customize it, whatever!"
    url: "/docs/license/"
    btn_label: "Learn More"
feature_row2:
  - image_path: mm-customizable-feature.png
    alt: "customizable"
    title: "Super Customizable"
    excerpt: "Everything from the menus, sidebars, comments, and more can be configured or set with YAML Front Matter."
    url: "/docs/configuration/"
    btn_label: "Learn More"
  - image_path: mm-responsive-feature.png
    alt: "fully responsive"
    title: "Responsive Layouts"
    excerpt: "Built on HTML5 + CSS3. All layouts are fully responsive with helpers to augment your content."
    url: "/docs/layouts/"
    btn_label: "Learn More"
  - image_path: mm-free-feature.png
    alt: "100% free"
    title: "100% Free"
    excerpt: "Free to use however you want under the MIT License. Clone it, fork it, customize it, whatever!"
    url: "/docs/license/"
    btn_label: "Learn More"
github:
  - excerpt: '{::nomarkdown}<iframe style="display: inline-block;" src="https://ghbtns.com/github-btn.html?user=mmistakes&repo=minimal-mistakes&type=star&count=true&size=large" frameborder="0" scrolling="0" width="160px" height="30px"></iframe> <iframe style="display: inline-block;" src="https://ghbtns.com/github-btn.html?user=mmistakes&repo=minimal-mistakes&type=fork&count=true&size=large" frameborder="0" scrolling="0" width="158px" height="30px"></iframe>{:/nomarkdown}'
---

{% include feature_row %}

{% include feature_row id="feature_row2" %}

<h1>{{ site.data.ui-text[site.locale].schedule | default: "SCHEDULE" }}</h1>

{% for post in site.posts %}
{% include archive-single.html %}
{% endfor %}
