README.md, before:

---
<!---
This is MD file so it needs the front matter or the build will fail
-->
---

# Local development

The site needs to be built and served by a web browser. To do them at the same time
use the following command, in the root of your project:

```bash
bundle exec jekyll serve
```

This command will also watch for changes in the site and rebuild it automatically.

If you prefer not to use the server provided by Jekyll you need to first build the site
with

```bash
bundle exec jekyll build
```

And then use a web server to serve the site, like for example the PHP built-in one

```bash
php -S localhost:8080 -t _site
```

P.S. For some reason using the PHP built-in server does not work well when rebulding the
site because of some style changes. I would recommend using Jekyll to serve the site.

## Docker

If you prefer you could use docker to create a container which will build and serve your project.

```bash
docker run --rm \
--volume="$PWD:/srv/jekyll" \
-p 4000:4000 \
-it jekyll/jekyll:3.8 \
jekyll serve
```

Your site will then be available at `http://0.0.0.0:4000`.

## Resumé to PDF

I use on online service to convert the PDF

https://pdfmyurl.com/

Commit message:

Add docker-compose file to run Jekyll and Ngrok containers

README.md, after:

---
<!---
This is MD file so it needs the front matter or the build will fail
-->
---

# Local development

The site needs to be built and served by a web browser. To do them at the same time
use the following command, in the root of your project:

```bash
bundle exec jekyll serve
```

This command will also watch for changes in the site and rebuild it automatically.

If you prefer not to use the server provided by Jekyll you need to first build the site
with

```bash
bundle exec jekyll build
```

And then use a web server to serve the site, like for example the PHP built-in one

```bash
php -S localhost:8080 -t _site
```

P.S. For some reason using the PHP built-in server does not work well when rebulding the
site because of some style changes. I would recommend using Jekyll to serve the site.

## Docker

If you prefer you could use docker to create a container which will build and serve your project.

```bash
docker run --rm \
--volume="$PWD:/srv/jekyll" \
-p 4000:4000 \
-it jekyll/jekyll:4.0 \
jekyll serve
```

Your site will then be available at `http://0.0.0.0:4000`.

You can also use the docker compose file provided to create two containers: one for Jekyll and 
one for Ngrok. Why? Because this will allow your local Jekyll site to be visible from outside.
This is particularly useful when updating the CV and you want to create the PDF before merging
the changes into the master branch.

So, run the following command:

```bash
docker-compose up
```

As I said this will create two containers. To find out the external URL you can use fro your
local Jekyll site you have two options:

- you can run the command `curl $(docker port ngrok 4040)/api/tunnels` and look for the
`public_url` key

or

- you can go to http://localhost:4040/

## Resumé to PDF

I use on online service to convert the PDF

https://pdfmyurl.com/
