---
title: "[Arrays] Max Consecutive Ones"

categories:
  - Arrays
tags:
  - [Consecutive]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-03-20
last_modified_at: 2023-03-20
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in LeetCode
{: .notice--danger}

## Problem

Given a binary array nums, return the maximum number of consecutive 1's in the array.

> Example 1:
>
> Input: nums = [1,1,0,1,1,1]
> Output: 3
> Explanation: The first two digits or the last three digits are consecutive 1s. The maximum number of consecutive 1s is 3.

> Example 2:
>
> Input: nums = [1,0,1,1,0,1]
> Output: 2

Constraints:

- 1 <= nums.length <= 10<sup>5</sup>
- nums[i] is either 0 or 1.

<br>

## Solution

Approach: One pass

Intuition: We keep a count of the number of contiguous 1's encountered. Whenever we encounter a 0, we update the maximum number of contiguous 1's seen so far and reset the count.

Algorithm:

1. Initialize two variables, maxCount and count, to 0.
2. Iterate through the input array.
3. If the current element is 1, increment count.
4. If the current element is 0, update maxCount with the current count if it is greater than maxCount, then reset count to 0.
5. Return maxCount after the iteration is complete.

```
using System;

namespace max_consecutive_ones
{
  class Program
  {
    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
      int[] nums = new int[] { 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1 };
      int result = FindMaxConsecutiveOnes(nums);
      Console.WriteLine(result);
    }

    public static int FindMaxConsecutiveOnes(int[] nums)
    {
      int count = 0;
      int maxCount = 0;

      for (int i = 0; i < nums.Length; i++)
      {
        if (nums[i] == 1)
        {
          count++;
        }
        else
        {
          maxCount = Math.Max(maxCount, count);
          count = 0;
        }
      }
      return Math.Max(maxCount, count);
    }
  }
}
```

<br>

## Explanation

### <u>Main Method</u>

```
static void Main(string[] args)
{
  int[] nums = new int[] { 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1 };
  int result = FindMaxConsecutiveOnes(nums);
  Console.WriteLine(result);
}
```

- int[] nums = new int[] { 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1 };
  : An integer array nums with some test values
- int result = FindMaxConsecutiveOnes(nums);
  : Call the FindMaxConsecutiveOnes method with nums as its parameter
  : It stores the result of FindMaxConsecutiveOnes in the result variable
- Console.WriteLine(result);
  : Print the value of result to the console

### <u>FindMaxConsecutiveOnes Method</u>

```
public static int FindMaxConsecutiveOnes(int[] nums)
{
  int count = 0;
  int maxCount = 0;

  for (int i = 0; i < nums.Length; i++)
  {
    if (nums[i] == 1)
    {
      count++;
    }
    else
    {
      maxCount = Math.Max(maxCount, count);
      count = 0;
    }
  }
  return Math.Max(maxCount, count);
}
```

- int count = 0; int maxCount = 0;
  : Two integer variables are initialized: count is set to 0, and maxCount is set to 0
- for (int i = 0; i < nums.Length; i++)
  : A for loop is used to iterate through each element in the nums array. The loop runs from index 0 to the index of the last element in the array (nums.Length - 1)
- if (nums[i] == 1) &rarr; count++;
  : 'if' statement checks if the current element is equal to 1
  : If it is, the count variable is incremented by 1
- else &rarr; maxCount = Math.Max(maxCount, count); count = 0;
  : If it's not, that means we've reached the end of a consecutive sequence of ones, so we update maxCount to be the maximum of its current value and count, and reset count to 0
- return Math.Max(maxCount, count);
  : After the loop finishes, we check one last time to see if the final sequence of ones is longer than any we've seen so far
  : We return the maximum count (maxCount)
  <br>

## For better understanding

### <u>for (int i = 0; i < nums.Length; i++)</u>

Let's say Array nums is { 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1 }

In for loop, 'i' starts from '0' and 'i' means 'index of nums array.

- In first loop, i = 0 &rarr; nums[0] = 1 so, count = 1
- In second loop, i = 1 &rarr; nums[1] = 0 so, reset count = 0
- In third loop, i = 2 &rarr; nums[2] = 1 so, count = 1
- In forth loop, i = 3 &rarr; nums[3] = 1 so, count = 2
- In fifth loop, i = 4 &rarr; nums[4] = 0 so, reset count = 0
- In sixth loop, i = 5 &rarr; nums[5] = 1 so, count = 1
- In seventh loop, i = 6 &rarr; nums[6] = 1 so, count = 2
- In eighth loop, i = 7 &rarr; nums[7] = 1 so, count = 3

### <u>maxCount = Math.Max(maxCount, count);</u>

The line 'maxCount = Math.Max(maxCount, count);' is used to update the maxCount variable with the maximum value between its current value and the value of the count variable.

The maxCount variable keeps track of the maximum number of consecutive ones that have been encountered in the array so far. If count exceeds maxCount at any point during the loop, then maxCount is updated to the new maximum value.

### <u>return Math.Max(maxCount, count);</u>

The reason we cannot return maxCount variable as the final result is that it may not always contain the correct value of the maximum consecutive ones. This is because if the nums array ends with consecutive ones, then the maxCount variable may not be updated with the correct value.

For example, if nums is {1, 1, 1}, when the for loop ends, maxCount will be set to 2. However, since the consecutive ones end at the end of the array, the count variable will be 3. In this case, we should return Math.Max(maxCount, count) to return the correct maximum consecutive ones value of 3.

Therefore, we need to return the maximum of maxCount and count using the Math.Max(maxCount, count) method in the return statement.

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
