---
title: "[Arrays] Merge Sorted Array"

categories:
  - Arrays
tags:
  - [Merge]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-04-04
last_modified_at: 2023-04-04
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in LeetCode!
{: .notice--danger}

# Problem

You are given two integer arrays nums1 and nums2, sorted in non-decreasing order, and two integers m and n, representing the number of elements in nums1 and nums2 respectively.

Merge nums1 and nums2 into a single array sorted in non-decreasing order.

The final sorted array should not be returned by the function, but instead be stored inside the array nums1. To accommodate this, nums1 has a length of m + n, where the first m elements denote the elements that should be merged, and the last n elements are set to 0 and should be ignored. nums2 has a length of n.

> Example 1:
>
> - Input: nums1 = [1,2,3,0,0,0], m = 3, nums2 = [2,5,6], n = 3
> - Output: [1,2,2,3,5,6]
> - Explanation: The arrays we are merging are [1,2,3] and [2,5,6].
> - The result of the merge is [1,2,2,3,5,6] with the underlined elements coming from nums1.

> Example 2:
>
> - Input: nums1 = [1], m = 1, nums2 = [], n = 0
> - Output: [1]
> - Explanation: The arrays we are merging are [1] and [].
> - The result of the merge is [1].

> Example 3:
>
> - Input: nums1 = [0], m = 0, nums2 = [1], n = 1
> - Output: [1]
> - Explanation: The arrays we are merging are [] and [1].
> - The result of the merge is [1].
> - Note that because m = 0, there are no elements in nums1. The 0 is only there to ensure the merge result can fit in nums1.

Constraints:

- nums1.length == m + n
- nums2.length == n
- 0 <= m, n <= 200
- 1 <= m + n <= 200
- -10<sup>9</sup> <= nums1[i], nums2[j] <= 10<sup>9</sup>

Follow up: Can you come up with an algorithm that runs in O(m + n) time?

{% capture notice-2 %}

Hints!

1. You can easily solve this problem if you simply think about two elements at a time rather than two arrays. We know that each of the individual arrays is sorted. What we don't know is how they will intertwine. Can we take a local decision and arrive at an optimal solution?
2. If you simply consider one element each at a time from the two arrays and make a decision and proceed accordingly, you will arrive at the optimal solution.
   {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--info">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div>

<br>

# Solution

Approach:

Algorithm:

1.

{% capture notice-2 %}

{% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--info">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div>

```

```

<br>

# Explanation

## Main Method

```

```

-

## FindNumbers Method

```

```

-

<br>

# For better understanding

## (int)((Math.Log10(nums[i])) + 1)

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
