---
title: "[Arrays] Duplicate Zeros"

categories:
  - Arrays
tags:
  - [Duplicate]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-03-27
last_modified_at: 2023-03-27
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in LeetCode!
{: .notice--danger}

# Problem

Given a fixed-length integer array arr, duplicate each occurrence of zero, shifting the remaining elements to the right.

Note that elements beyond the length of the original array are not written. Do the above modifications to the input array in place and do not return anything.
{: .notice--info}

> Example 1:
>
> Input: arr = [1,0,2,3,0,4,5,0]
> Output: [1,0,0,2,3,0,0,4]
> Explanation: After calling your function, the input array is modified to: [1,0,0,2,3,0,0,4]

> Example 2:
>
> Input: arr = [1,2,3]
> Output: [1,2,3]
> Explanation: After calling your function, the input array is modified to: [1,2,3]

Constraints:

- 1 <= arr.length <= 10<sup>4</sup>
- 0 <= arr[i] <= 9

{% capture notice-2 %}

Hints!

1. This is a great introductory problem for understanding and working with the concept of in-place operations. The problem statement clearly states that we are to modify the array in-place. That does not mean we cannot use another array. We just don't have to return anything.
2. A better way to solve this would be without using additional space. The only reason the problem statement allows you to make modifications in place is that it hints at avoiding any additional memory.
3. The main problem with not using additional memory is that we might override elements due to the zero duplication requirement of the problem statement. How do we get around that?
4. If we had enough space available, we would be able to accommodate all the elements properly. The new length would be the original length of the array plus the number of zeros. Can we use this information somehow to solve the problem?
   {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--info">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div>

<br>

# Solution

Approach:

Algorithm:

1.

{% capture notice-2 %}

{% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--info">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div>

```

```

<br>

# Explanation

## Main Method

```

```

-

## FindNumbers Method

```

```

-

<br>

# For better understanding

## (int)((Math.Log10(nums[i])) + 1)

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
