---
title: "[Arrays] Find Numbers with Even Number of Digits"

categories:
  - Arrays
tags:
  - [Even]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-03-21
last_modified_at: 2023-03-21
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in LeetCode!
{: .notice--danger}

# Problem

Given an array nums of integers, return how many of them contain an even number of digits.

> Example 1:
>
> Input: nums = [12,345,2,6,7896]
> Output: 2
> Explanation:
> 12 contains 2 digits (even number of digits).
> 345 contains 3 digits (odd number of digits).
> 2 contains 1 digit (odd number of digits).
> 6 contains 1 digit (odd number of digits).
> 7896 contains 4 digits (even number of digits).
> Therefore only 12 and 7896 contain an even number of digits.

> Example 2:
>
> Input: nums = [555,901,482,1771]
> Output: 1
> Explanation:
> Only 1771 contains an even number of digits.

Constraints:

- 1 <= nums.length <= 500
- 1 <= nums[i] <= 105

{% capture notice-2 %}

Hint!

- How to compute the number of digits of a number ?
- Divide the number by 10 again and again to get the number of digits.
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--info">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div>

<br>

# Solution

Approach: Loop through each element in the array and count the number of digits in each element. If the number of digits is even, the count is incremented. Finally, the total count is returned.

Algorithm:

1. Initialize a variable 'count' to 0 to keep track of the count of elements with an even number digits.
2. Loop through each element in the input array 'nums' using a 'for' loop. For each element, calculate the number of digits in the element using the 'Math.Log10' function.
   : 'Math.Log10' is a method that calculates the base-10 logarithm of a given number.
   : In this code, 'Math.Log10(nums[i])' is used to calculate the number of digits in the integer 'nums[i]'.
3. Cast the result of the 'Math.Log10' function to an integer using the '(int)' operator.
4. Check whether the resulting number is even using the modulus operator '%'. If the number of digits is even, increment the 'count' variable.
5. Continue looping through the rest of the elements in the input array until all elements have been processed.
6. Return the final value of 'count', which represents the total count of elements in the input array 'nums' that have an even number of digits.

{% capture notice-2 %}

Overall, the algorithm has a time complexity of O(n) since it loops through each element in the input array exactly once.

- In computer science, time complexity is a measure of how long an algorithm takes to run as a function of the input size.
- In this case, the algorithm loops through each element in the input array exactly once, so the time it takes to run the algorithm increases linearly with the size of the input array. We say that the time complexity of the algorithm is O(n), where 'n' is the size of the input array.
- This means that as the size of the input array grows, the running time of the algorithm grows linearly with it. For example, if the input array doubles in size, the running time of the algorithm will roughly double as well.
- A time complexity of O(n) is considered a relatively efficient algorithm, as it scales linearly with input size. Other algorithm with higher time complexities (e.g., O(n^2), O(2^n)) may be prohibitively slow for large input sizes.
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--info">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div>

```
using System;

namespace find_num_even_num_digits
{
  class Program
  {
    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
      int[] nums = new int[] { 12, 111, 3500, 75, 888 };
      int result = FindNumbers(nums);
      Console.WriteLine(result);
    }

    public static int FindNumbers(int[] nums)
    {
      int count = 0;
      for (int i = 0; i < nums.Length; i++)
      {
        if ((int)((Math.Log10(nums[i])) + 1) % 2 == 0)
        {
          count++;
        }
      }
      return count;
    }
  }
}
```

<br>

# Explanation

## Main Method

```
static void Main(string[] args)
{
  int[] nums = new int[] { 12, 111, 3500, 75, 888 };
  int result = FindNumbers(nums);
  Console.WriteLine(result);
}
```

- This is the 'Main' method of the 'Program' class. It is the entry point of the program and is executed when the program is run.
- int[] nums = new int[] { 12, 111, 3500, 75, 888 };
  : An array of integers named 'nums' is created and initialized with some values.
- int result = FindNumbers(nums);
  : 'FindNumbers' method is called with 'nums' as an argument, and the result is stored in an integer variable named 'result'.
- Console.WriteLine(result);
  : The value of 'result' is printed to the console using the 'Console.WriteLine' method

## FindNumbers Method

```
public static int FindNumbers(int[] nums)
{
  int count = 0;
  for (int i = 0; i < nums.Length; i++)
  {
    if ((int)((Math.Log10(nums[i])) + 1) % 2 == 0)
    {
      count++;
    }
  }
  return count;
}
```

- This is the 'FindNumbers' method, which takes an array of integers as an argument and returns an integer representing the count of elements with an even number of digits.
- int count = 0;
  : An integer variable 'count' is initialized to 0.
- for (int i = 0; i < nums.Length; i++)
  : A 'for' loop is used to iterate over each element of the input array 'nums'.
- if ((int)((Math.Log10(nums[i])) + 1) % 2 == 0) &rarr; count++;
  : For each element, the number of digits is calculated using the 'Math.Log10' function, and the resulting number is checked to see if it is even using the modulus operator '%'.
  : If the number of digits is even, the 'count' variable is incremented.
- return count;
  : The method returns the value of the 'count' variable, which represents the total count of elements in the input array 'nums' that have an even number of digits.

<br>

# For better understanding

## (int)((Math.Log10(nums[i])) + 1)

'Math.Log10()' is a method in the .NET Framework's 'System.Math' class that calculates the base-10 logarithm of a given number. In this code, 'Math.Log10(nums[i])' is used to calculate the number of digits in the integer 'nums[i]'.

Specifically, the expression 'Math.Log10(nums[i]) + 1' calculates the logarithm of 'nums[i]' base 10, adds 1 to it (since the number of digits in a number 'n' is equal to the floor of the logarithm of 'n' base 10 plus one), and returns the resulting value.

The resulting value is then cast to an integer using '(int)' to get the number of digits in 'nums[i]'.

For example, if 'nums[i]' is 123, 'Math.Log10(123) + 1' would evaluate to 3.086, and casting this value to an integer using '(int)' would give the integer value 3, which represents the number of digits in 123.

In the code, this number of digits is then checked to see if it is even or odd, and if it is even, the count of numbers with even digits is incremented.

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
