---
title: "Road Data Enrichment Framework Based on Heterogeneous Data Fusion for ITS"
header:
  teaser: "/assets/files/papers/22/paper-img.png"
author_profile: false
comments: true
categories:
  - Papers
tags:
  - ITS
  - MAPS
  - LBSM
  - Social Networks
  - Twitter
sidebar:
  - title: "Files"
    text: "[PDF](/assets/files/papers/22/22-road-data-enrichment-framework-based-on-heterogeneous-data-fusion-for-its.pdf){: .btn .btn--success}{: target=\"_blank\"} [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2020.2971111){: .btn .btn--success}{: target=\"_blank\"} "
    image: /assets/files/papers/22/paper-img.png

---

In this work, we propose the Road Data Enrichment (RoDE), a framework that fuses data from heterogeneous data sources to enhance Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) services, such as vehicle routing and traffic event detection. We describe RoDE through two services: (i) Route service, and (ii) Event service. For the first service, we present the Twitter MAPS (T-MAPS), a low-cost spatiotemporal model to improve the description of traffic conditions through Location-Based Social Media (LBSM) data. As a case study, we explain how T-MAPS is able to enhance routing and trajectory descriptions by using tweets. Our experiments compare T-MAPS’ routes against Google Maps’ routes, showing up to 62% of route similarity, even though T-MAPS uses fewer and coarse-grained data. We then propose three applications, Route Sentiment (RS), Route Information (RI), and Area Tags (AT), to enrich T-MAPS’ suggested routes. For the second service, we present the Twitter Incident (T-Incident), a low-cost learning-based road incident detection and enrichment approach built using heterogeneous data fusion. Our approach uses a learning-based model to identify patterns on social media data which is then used to describe a class of events, aiming to detect different types of events. Our model to detect events achieved scores above 90%, thus allowing incident detection and description as a RoDE application. As a result, the enriched event description allows ITS to better understand the LBSM user’s viewpoint about traffic events (e.g., jams) and points of interest (e.g., restaurants, theaters, stadiums).
{: style="text-align: justify;"}

Please cite:
```TeX
@article{rettore2020road,
  title={Road data enrichment framework based on heterogeneous data fusion for ITS},
  author={Rettore, Paulo HL and Santos, Bruno P and Lopes, Roberto Rigolin F and Maia, Guilherme and Villas, Leandro A and Loureiro, Antonio AF},
  journal={IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems},
  volume={21},
  number={4},
  pages={1751--1766},
  year={2020},
  publisher={IEEE}
}
```
###### **Founding agencies**: CNPq/CAPES/FAPEMIG.