---
title: "A Privacy-Preserving Contact Tracing System based on a Publish-Subscribe Model"
header:
  teaser: "/assets/files/papers/44/paper-img.png"
author_profile: false
comments: true
categories:
  - Papers
tags:
  - Cyber Defense
  - SDN
sidebar:
  - title: "Files"
    text: "[PDF](/assets/files/papers/44/3781-Article Text-21833-1-10-20240811.pdf){: .btn .btn--success}{: target=\"_blank\"} [DOI](https://doi.org/10.5753/jisa.2024.3781){: .btn .btn--success}{: target=\"_blank\"} "
    image: /assets/files/papers/44/paper-img.png

---

In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, using contact-tracking apps and measures such as social isolation and mask-wearing has emerged as an efficient strategy to mitigate the spread of the virus. Nonetheless, these apps have raised privacy concerns. This paper introduces a technique for enhancing Privacy in contact-tracing systems while preserving the data for research purposes. The contact-tracing system employs a unique identifier signed with a key associated with the application and the user. In this system, mobile devices serve as sensors sending beacons, actively detecting nearby devices, and transmitting the identifiers of surrounding contacts to a cloud-based platform. When a user reports a positive COVID-19 diagnosis, a dedicated web service identifies and tracks the identifiers associated with at-risk contacts. The system uses a topic-based publish-subscribe broker, and each identifier represents an individual topic to abstract contact communication and disseminate alert messages. To assess the system's efficacy, we conducted a use case with twenty volunteers using the mobile application for two weeks, representing a small university campus. The quantitative results of the use case demonstrated the system's capability of analyzing potential virus transmission and observing user's social interactions while maintaining their anonymity.
{: style="text-align: justify;"}

Please cite:
```TeX
@article{da2024privacy,
  title={A Privacy-Preserving Contact Tracing System based on a Publish-Subscribe Model},
  author={da Silva, Mikaella F and Santos, Bruno P and Rettore, Paulo HL and Mota, Vin{\'\i}cius FS},
  journal={Journal of Internet Services and Applications},
  volume={15},
  number={1},
  pages={244--257},
  year={2024}
}
```
> Mikaella F. da Silva, Bruno P. Santos, Paulo H. L. Rettore, Vinícius F. S. Mota.
###### **Founding agencies**: CNPq/CAPES/FAPEMIG.

