---
title: "[C#] C# Properties (Get and Set)"

categories:
  - CS
tags:
  - [Properties, Get, Set]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-05-24
last_modified_at: 2023-05-24
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the c# tutorials!

- Reference tutorials link: <https://www.w3schools.com/cs/index.php>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Programming 2"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

# Properties and Encapsulation

The meaning of Encapsulation, is to make sure that "sensitive" data is hidden from users. To achieve this, you must:

- declare fields/variables as private
- provide public get and set methods, through properties, to access and update the value of a private field

<br>

## Properties

Private variables can only be accessed within the same class (an outside class has no access to it). However, sometimes we need to access them - and it can be done with properties.

Property in C# is a class member that exposes the class’s private fields. Internally, C# properties are special methods called accessors.

A property is like a combination of a variable and a method, and it has two methods: a get and a set method:

```
class Person
{
  private string name; // field

  public string Name // property
  {
    get { return name; } // get method
    set { name = value; } // set method
  }
}
```

- The Name property is associated with the name field. It is a good practice to use the same name for both the property and the private field, but with an uppercase first letter.
- A C# property has two accessors, a get property accessor or a getter and a set property accessor or a setter.
- The get method returns the value of the variable name.
- The set method assigns a value to the name variable. The value keyword represents the value we assign to the property.

Now we can use the Name property to access and update the private field of the Person class:

```
class Person
{
  private string name; // field

  public string Name // property
  {
    get { return name; }
    set { name = value; }
  }
}

class Program
{
  static void Main(string[] args)
  {
    Person myObj = new Person();
    myObj.Name = "Liam";

    Console.WriteLine(myObj.Name);
  }
}

// Output: Liam
```

get and set are accessors used in the property declaration of the Name property in the Person class. They define how the property is accessed and modified.

The get accessor is used to retrieve the value of the property, and the set accessor is used to assign a new value to the property.

- get Accessor:
  : - It is used to retrieve the current value of the property.
  : - In the code snippet get { return name; }, it returns the value of the private field name when the Name property is accessed.
- set Accessor:
  : - It is used to assign a new value to the property.
  : - In the code snippet set { name = value; }, it assigns the incoming value (value) to the private field name when the Name property is assigned a new value.

```
using System;

namespace studentInfo
{
  class Student
  {
    private string sname;
    private int sno;

    // Declare a Name property of type string:
    public string Name
    {
      get { return sname; }
      set { name = value; }
    }

    // Declare a Number property of type int:
    public int Number
    {
      get { return sno; }
      set { age = value; }
    }

    public override string ToString()
    {
      return "Student Name = " + Name + ", Student No = " + Number;
    }
  }

  class ExampleDemo
  {
    public static void Main()
    {
      // Create a new Student object:
      Student s = new Student();

      // Setting name and sno
      s.Name = "John";
      s.Number = 7;

      Console.WriteLine("Student Info: {0}", s);

      // Let us increase sno
      s.Number += 1;

      Console.WriteLine("Student Info: {0}", s);

      Console.ReadKey();
    }
  }
}
```

<br>

## Access Levels of Properties

Properties in C# have various access levels defined by an access modifier. Properties can be read-write properties, read-only properties, or write-only properties.

- The read-write property implements both a get and a set accessor.
- A write-only property implements a set accessor but no get accessor.
- A read-only property implements a get accessor but no set accessor.

<br>

## Automatic Properties (Short Hand)

C# also provides a way to use short-hand / automatic properties, where you do not have to define the field for the property, and you only have to write get; and set; inside the property.

The following example will produce the same result as the example above. The only difference is that there is less code:

Using automatic properties:

```
class Person
{
  public string Name // property
  { get; set; }
}

class Program
{
  static void Main(string[] args)
  {
    Person myObj = new Person();
    myObj.Name = "Liam";

    Console.WriteLine(myObj.Name);
  }
}
```

<br>

## Why Encapsulation?

- Better control of class members (reduce the possibility of yourself (or others) to mess up the code)
- Fields can be made read-only (if you only use the get method), or write-only (if you only use the set method)
- Flexible: the programmer can change one part of the code without affecting other parts
- Increased security of data

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
