---
title: "[C#] C# OOP & Class and Object"

categories:
  - CS
tags:
  - [OOP, Class, Object]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-05-24
last_modified_at: 2023-05-24
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the c# tutorials!

- Reference tutorials link: <https://www.w3schools.com/cs/index.php>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Programming 2"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

# What is OOP?

OOP: Object-Oriented Programming

Procedural programming is about writing procedures or methods that perform operations on the data, while object-oriented programming is about creating objects that contain both data and methods.

Object-oriented programming has several advantages over procedural programming:

- OOP is faster and easier to execute.
- OOP provides a clear structure for the programs.
- OOP helps to keep the C# code DRY "Don't Repeat Yourself", and makes the code easier to maintain, modify and debug.
- OOP makes it possible to create full reusable applications with less code and shorter development time.

<br>

# What are Classes and Objects?

Classes and objects are the two main aspects of object-oriented programming.

Example of Class and Object:

| Class | Objects |
| :---- | :------ |
| Fruit | Apple   |
|       | Banana  |
|       | Mango   |

- Class is a template for objects.
- Object is an instance of a class.

When the individual objects are created, they inherit all the variables and methods from the class.

<br>

# Classes and Objects

- A car is an object.
- The car has attributes, such as weight and color, and methods, such as drive and brake.
- A Class is like an object constructor, or a "blueprint" for creating objects.

<br>

## Create a Class

Create a class named "Car" with a variable color:

```
class Car
{
  string color = "red";
}
```

{% capture notice-2 %}

When a variable is declared directly in a class, it is often referred to as a field (or attribute).

It is not required, but it is a good practice to start with an uppercase first letter when naming classes. Also, it is common that the name of the C# file and the class matches, as it makes our code organized. However it is not required (like in Java).
{% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div>

<br>

## Create an Object

Create an object called "myObj" and use it to print the value of color:

```
class Car
{
  string color = "red";

  static void Main(string[] args)
  {
    Car myObj = new Car();
    Console.WriteLine(myObj.color);
  }
}
// Car myObj -> Car is the name of variable
// new Car() -> Car is the name of Class
```

<br>

## Multiple Objects

Create two objects of Car:

```
class Car
{
  string color = "red";

  static void Main(string[] args)
  {
    Car myObj1 = new Car();
    Car myObj2 = new Car();

    Console.WriteLine(myObj1.color);
    Console.WriteLine(myObj2.color);
  }
}
```

<br>

## Using Multiple Classes

You can also create an object of a class and access it in another class. This is often used for better organization of classes (one class has all the fields and methods, while the other class holds the Main() method (code to be executed)).

- prog2.cs
- prog.cs

```
class Car
{
  public string color = "red";
}
```

```
class Program
{
  static void Main(string[] args)
  {
    Car myObj = new Car();
    Console.WriteLine(myObj.color);
  }
}
```

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
