---
excerpt: Announcing stable version 1.1 for SDL Knowledge Center 2016 Content Manager
tags:
- PowerShell
- ISHDeploy
- SDL
- Knowledge Center
- Content Manager
date: 2016-09-15 10:36:14
categories:
- SDL
- Knowledge-Center
- SDL
- Knowledge-Center
- Content-Manager
title: ISHDeploy stable version 1.1 is available

---



> As a reminder, **ISHDeploy** is a PowerShell automation module for **SDL Knowledge Center 2016 Content Manager** deployments. 
> 
> For more detailed analysis please refer to previews [post]({% link _posts/ishdeploy/2016-07-04-what-is-ishdeploy.md %}). 

The first **stable** versions for ISHDeploy.12.0.1 and ISHDeploy.12.0.0 are now available. Since Knowledge Center 2016SP1 with Content Manager 12.0.1 has been released, the reference module is ISHDeploy.12.0.1.

- [PowerShell Gallery](http://www.powershellgallery.com/packages/ISHDeploy.12.0.1/)
- [Documentation portal](https://sdl.github.io/ISHDeploy/12.0.1/)
- Release artifact on [github](https://github.com/sdl/ISHDeploy/releases/tag/stable-1.1) and code

## What is possible with ISHDeploy.12.0.1?

With this first stable release the module offers this functionality

- Query all available deployments.
    - Basic deployment management
    - Get the history.
    - Get the input parameters.
    - Rollback all changes applied with this module's cmdlets.
    - Retrieve files generated by the module.
- Basic UI configuration of the web client
    - Enable/Disable the external preview feature.
    - Enable/Disable and license Content Editor.
    - Enable/Disable Quality assistant.
    - Configure event monitor tabs.
- Integrate the deployment with an external security token service.
    - Enable/Disable the internal user authentication.
    - Execute a Token signing certificate rollover.
    - Execute a service certificate rollover.
- Configure the internal security token service aka ISHSTS
    - Service certificate rollover.
    - Execute a token signing certificate rollover.
    - Enable windows light weight authentication.
    - Configure relying parties.

Please take a moment to read carefully the release nots before using the module. 

## What to expect in the future?

The plan for the next release is to enhance the “Basic deployment management” with the following functionality.

- Add/Remove menu items
- Add/Remove search menu items
- Add/Remove buttons in various button bars

The above priority is based on the feedback from the internal professional services teams but if you would like to influence the backlog please make sure you share your feedback.

## Where to reach out for feedback and questions?

- Bellow in the comments
- On the github [repository](https://github.com/sdl/ISHDeploy/)
