---
title: "[Exercise] 6.1 Real Numbers, Order, and Absolute Value"

categories:
  - Func-Num
tags:
  - [Number, Value]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-01-12
last_modified_at: 2023-01-12
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Math175-002 Functions & Number Systems"
{: .notice--danger}

## Section 6.1 &rarr; No. 1 ~ 11

### Concept Check. Give a number that satisfies the given condition.

1. An integer between 4.5 and 5.5 &rarr; 5
2. A rational number between 2.8 and 2.9 &rarr; 2.85
3. A whole number that is not positive and is less than 1 &rarr; 0
4. A whole number greater than 4.5 &rarr; 5
5. An irrational number that is between Root 17 and Root 19 &rarr; Root 18
6. A real number that is neither negative nor positive &rarr; 0

### Concept Check. Write true or false for each statement.

7. Every natural number is positive. &rarr; T
8. Every whole number is positive. &rarr; F
9. Every integer is a rational number. &rarr; T
10. Every rational number is a real number. &rarr; T

### List all numbers from each set that are (a)natural numbers; (b)whole numbers; (c)integers; (d)rational numbers; (e)irrational numbers; (f)real numbers.

11. {-9, -Root 7, -1 and 1/4, -3/5, 0, Root 5, 3, 5.9, 7}
    - (a)natural numbers: 3, 7
    - (b)whole numbers: 0, 3, 7
    - (c)integers: 0, 3, 7, -9
    - (d)rational numbers: 0, 3, 7, -9, -1 and 1/4, -3/5, 5.9
    - (e)irrational numbers: -Root 7, Root 5
    - (f)real numbers: -9, -Root 7, -1 and 1/4, -3/5, 0, Root 5, 3, 5.9, 7

<br>

## Section 6.1 &rarr; No. 31 ~ 39 (Part b)

### Concept Check.

31. Match each expression in Column I with its value in Column II. Some choices in Column II may not be used.
    <br> &rarr; Answer. (a)-A, (b)-A, (c)-B, (d)-B

### Concept Check.

32. Fill in the blanks with the correct values:
    <br> &rarr; Answer. The opposite of -2 is [2], while the absolute value of -2 is [2]. The additive inverse of -2 is [2], while the additive inverse of the absolute value of -2 is [-2].

### Find (a) the additive inverse (or opposite) of each number and (b) the absolute value of each number.

33. -2 &rarr; (a)2, (b)2
34. -8 &rarr; (a)8, (b)8
35. 6 &rarr; (a)-6, (b)6
36. 11 &rarr; (a)-11, (b)11
37. 7 - 4 &rarr; (a)-3, (b)3
38. 8 - 3 &rarr; (a)-5, (b)5
39. 7 - 7 &rarr; (a)0, (b)0

<br>

## Section 6.1 &rarr; No. 53 ~ 63 (odd)

### Write true or false for each statement.

53. T
54. T
55. T
56. F
57. T
58. F

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
