---
title: "[Func-Num] 7.6 Polynomials and Factoring"

categories:
  - Func-Num
tags:
  - [Polynomials, Factoring]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-03-02
last_modified_at: 2023-03-02
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Math175-002 Functions & Number Systems"
{: .notice--danger}

> ## Objectives
>
> 1. Identify polynomials using the basic terminology of polynomials.
> 2. Add and subtract polynomials.
> 3. Multiply polynomials.
> 4. Multiply two binomials using the FOIL method.
> 5. Find special products of binomials.
> 6. Factor the greatest common factor from a polynomial.
> 7. Factor a trinomial using the FOIL method in reverse.
> 8. Factor a perfect square trinomial and a difference of squares.

<br>

## Polynomials and Factoring

1. Basic Terminology
2. Addition and Subtraction
3. Multiplication
4. Special Products
5. Factoring
6. Factoring Out the Greatest Common Factor
7. Factoring by Grouping
8. Factoring Trinomials
9. Factoring Special Binomials

<br>

## 1. Basic Terminology

- A term, or monomial, is defined to be a number, a variable, or a product of numbers and variables.
  : Examples: 7, and 8r
- A polynomial is a term, or a finite sum or difference of terms, with only nonnegative integer exponents permitted on the variables. If the terms of a polynomial contain only the variable x, then the polynomial is called a polynomial in x. (Polynomials in other variables are defined similarly.)
  : Example: 3x<sup>5</sup> + 4x – 1
- The expression 9x<sup>2</sup> - 4x -
  $$ {6} \over {x} $$
  is not a polynomial because of the presence of -
  $$ {6} \over {x} $$
  &rarr; The terms of a polynomial cannot have variables in a denominator.
- The greatest exponent in a polynomial in one variable is the degree of the polynomial. A non-zero constant is said to have degree 0. (The polynomial 0 has no degree.)
  : Examples: 3x<sup>6</sup> - 5x<sup>2</sup> + 2x + 3 is a polynomial of degree 6 .
- A term containing more than one variable has degree equal to the sum of all the exponents appearing on the variables in the term.
  : Example: 4x<sup>2</sup>y<sup>3</sup>z + 3x<sup>2</sup>y<sup>2</sup>z has degree 6.
- A polynomial containing exactly three terms is called a trinomial and one containing exactly two terms is a binomial.

  | Polynomial                                       | Degree | Type      |
  | :----------------------------------------------- | :----- | :-------- |
  | 9x<sup>4</sup> - 4x<sup>3</sup> + 8x<sup>2</sup> | 4      | Trinomial |
  | 29x<sup>3</sup> + 8x<sup>2</sup>                 | 3      | Binomial  |
  | -10x                                             | 1      | Monomial  |

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
