---
title: "[Func-Num] Linear Equation"

categories:
  - Func-Num
tags:
  - [Equation]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-02-11
last_modified_at: 2023-02-11
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Math175-002 Functions & Number Systems"
{: .notice--danger}

## Linear Equations

- Solving Linear Equations
- Special Kinds of Linear Equations
- Literal Equations and Formulas
- Models

<br>

## Algebraic Expression

An algebraic expression involves only the basic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division (except by 0), or raising to powers or taking roots on any collection of variables and numbers.

### <u>Algebraic expressions examples:</u>

- 4x - 7
- $$\sqrt{m}+ 3$$
- $${xy^3z} \over {k}$$

<br>

## Equation

An equation is a statement that two algebraic expressions are equal. A linear equation in one variable involves only real numbers and one variable.

### <u>Linear equations examples:</u>

- 4x - 7 = 8
- 5k + 3 = k + 1

<br>

## Linear Equation in One Variable

An equation in the variable x is linear if it can be written in the form "Ax + B = C", where A, B, and C are real numbers, with A != 0.

<br>

## Terminology

- A linear equation in one variable is also called a first-degree equation.
- If the variable in an equation is replaced by a real number that makes the statement of the equation true, then that number is a solution of the equation.
- An equation is solved by finding its solution set, the set of all answers.
- Equivalent equations are equations with the same solution set.

<br>

## Addition Property of Equality

For all real numbers A, B, and C, the equations "A = B and A + C = B + C" are equivalent. (The same number may be added to both sides of an equation without changing the solution set.)

<br>

## Multiplication Property of Equality

For all real numbers A, B, and C, the equations "A = B and AC = BC" are equivalent. (Both sides of an equation may be multiplied by the same nonzero number without changing the solution set.)

<br>

## Solving a Linear Equation in One Variable

- Step 1 Clear fractions. Multiply both sides by a common denominator.
- Step 2 Simplify each side separately. Clear parentheses and combine like terms.
- Step 3 Isolate the variable terms on one side. Use the addition property of equality.
- Step 4 Transform so that the coefficient of the variable is 1. Use the multiplication property of equality.
- Step 5 Check. Substitute the solution into the original equation.

### <u>Example 1: Solve a Linear Equation using the Distributive Property</u>

Q. Solve 3(k + 1) + 2k = 13.

| Solution              |                        |
| :-------------------- | :--------------------- |
| Distributive property | 3k + 3 + 2k = 13       |
| Combine like terms    | 5k + 3 = 13            |
| Subtract 3            | 5k + 3 – 3 = 13 – 3    |
| Combine like terms    | 5k = 10                |
| Divide by 5           | 5k/5 = 10/5 &rarr; k=2 |

&rarr; Check that the solution set is {2} by substituting 2 for k in the original equation.

### <u>Example 2: Solve a Linear Equation with Fractions</u>

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
