---
title: "[Func-Num] 6.2 Operations, Properties, and Applications of Real Numbers"

categories:
  - Func-Num
tags:
  - [Number, Operation]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-01-13
last_modified_at: 2023-01-14
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Math175-002 Functions & Number Systems"
{: .notice--danger}

> ## Objectives
>
> 1. Operations of additions, substraction, multiplication, and division of signed numbers
> 2. The rules for order of operations
> 3. Properties of addition and multiplication of real numbers
> 4. Change in investment and meteorological data using subtraction and absolute value

<br>

## Operations on Real Numbers

### 1. Definition of Subtraction

- The result of subtracting two numbers is their difference.
- "The difference of A and B" is interpreted as "A-B"
- For all real numbers A and B, A-B = A+(-B) &rarr; Change the sign of the subtrahend and Add.
- In A-B, A is the **minuend**, and B is the **subtrahend**.
- [What is Subtrahend?](https://www.splashlearn.com/math-vocabulary/subtraction/subtrahend)

### 2. Multiplying Real Numbers

- The result of multiplying two numbers is their product.
- The two numbers being multiplied are factors.

> **Like Signs**:
>
> - Multiply two numbers with the same sign by multiplying their
>   absolute values to find the absolute value of the product.
> - The product is positive.
>
> **Unlike Signs**:
>
> - Multiply two numbers with different signs by multiplying their
>   absolute values to find the absolute value of the product.
> - The product is negative.

> **Sign Rules for Multiplication**
>
> 1. (+)\*(+) = +
> 2. (-)\*(-) = +
> 3. (+)\*(-) = -
> 4. (-)\*(+) = -

### 3. Dividing Real Numbers

- The result of dividing two numbers is their quotient.
- "The quotient of A and B" is interpreted as "A/B"
- In the quotient A/B, where B≠0, A is the **dividend (or numerator)**, and B is the **divisor (or denominator)**.

> **Like Signs**:
>
> - Divide two numbers with the same sign by dividing their absolute
>   values to find the absolute value of the quotient.
> - The quotient is positive.
>
> **Unlike Signs**:
>
> - Divide two numbers with different signs by dividing their absolute
>   values to find the absolute value of the quotient.
> - The quotient is negative.

> **Sign Rules for Division**
>
> 1. (+)/(+) = +
> 2. (-)/(-) = +
> 3. (+)/(-) = -
> 4. (-)/(+) = -

> **Division Involving Zero**
>
> 1. A/0 is undefined for all A
> 2. 0/A = 0 for all nonzero A

<br>

## Order of Operations

If parentheses or square brackets are present:

- Step 1 Work separately above and below any fraction bar.
- Step 2 Use the rules below within each set of parentheses or square brackets. Start with the innermost set and work outward.

If no parentheses or brackets are present:

- Step 1 Apply any exponents.
- Step 2 Do any multiplications or divisions in the order in which they occur, working from left to right.
- Step 3 Do any additions or subtractions in the order in which they occur, working from left to right.

> "Please Excuse My Dear Aunt Sally"
>
> - **P**arenthese
> - **E**xponents
> - **M**ultiply
> - **D**ivide
> - **A**dd
> - **S**ubtract
>
> &rarr; M and D have equal priority
> &rarr; A and S have equal priority

<br>

## Properties of Addition and Multiplication of Real Numbers

For real numbers a, b, and c, the following properties hold.

### Closure Properties:

The sum of two real numbers and the product of two real numbers are themselves real numbers

> a + b and a \* b are real numbers.

### Commutative Properties:

Two real numbers may be added or multiplied in either order without affecting the result

> - a + b = b + a
> - a \* b = b \* a

### Associative Properties

Group terms or factors in any manner we wish without affecting the result

> - (a + b) + c = a + (b + c)
> - (a \* b) \* c = a \* (b \* c)

### Identity Properties

- The number 0 is the identity element for addition. Adding 0 to a real number
  will always yield that real number.
- The number 1 is the identity element for multiplication. Multiplying a real num-ber by 1 will always yield that real number.
  > - There is a real number 0 such that &rarr; a + 0 = a and 0 + a = a.
  > - There is a real number 1 such that &rarr; a \* 1 = a and 1 \* a = a.

### Inverse Properties

- Each real number a has an additive inverse, -a, such that the sum of a and its additive inverse is the additive identity element 0.
- Each nonzero real number a has a multiplicative inverse, or reciprocal, 1/a, such that the product of a and its multiplicative inverse is the multiplicative identity
  element 1.
  > - For each real number a, there is a single real
  >   number -a such that &rarr; a + (−a) = 0 and (−a) + a = 0.
  > - For each nonzero real number a, there is a
  >   single real number 1/a such that &rarr; a \* 1/a = 1 and 1/a \* a = 1.

### Distributive Property of Multiplication with Respect to Addition

Express certain products as sums and certain sums as products

> - a \* (b + c) = a \* b + a \* c
> - (b + c) \* a = b \* a + c \* a

<br>

## Exercise

### Section 6.2 &rarr; No. 31 ~ 43 (odds)

31. -6

32. 27

33. 0

34. -1

35. -4

36. 7

37. 13

### Section 6.2 &rarr; No. 67 ~ 73 (odds)

67. -81

68. 81

69. -81

70. -81

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
