---
title: "[Func-Num] 6.1 Real Numbers, Order, and Absolute Value"

categories:
  - Func-Num
tags:
  - [Number, Value]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-01-11
last_modified_at: 2023-01-12
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Math175-002 Functions & Number Systems"
{: .notice--danger}

> ## Objectives
>
> 1. A number on a number line
> 2. A number as positive, negative, or zero
> 3. A number as belonging to one or more sets of numbers
> 4. Given 2 numbers A and B, determine whether A = B, A < B, or A > B
> 5. Given a number A, determine its additive inverse and absolute value
> 6. Signed numbers in tables of economic and occupations data

<br>

## Sets of Real Numbers

### 1. Natural Numbers

{1, 2, 3, 4, ...} is the set of **natural numbers**
<br> &rarr; Numbers which we can count

### 2. Whole Numbers

{0, 1, 2, 3, 4, ...} is the set of **whole numbers**
<br> &rarr; Including 0

### 3. Number Line

> [Number Line Image Link](https://d138zd1ktt9iqe.cloudfront.net/media/seo_landing_files/number-line-negative-and-positive-1634275662.png)
>
> - Origin: "0"
> - The right of "0": Positive numbers {1, 2, 3, ...}
> - The left of "0": Negative numbers {-1, -2, -3, ...}

- Signed numbers: Positive numbers and Negative numbers
- "0" itself: Neither positive nor negative
- Practical applications of negative numbers: Temperatures, Altitude below sea level

[Signed and Unsigned Numbers](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/introduction-to-digital/9780470900550/chap2-sec009.html)
<br> [Signed vs Unsigned](https://www.scaler.com/topics/sql/signed-vs-unsigned/)

> Difference between Signed and Unsigned in MySQL
>
> - Signed value - Variables with signed numerals can store 0, positive, and negative numbers.
> - Unsigned value - Variables with unsigned numerals can store only 0 and positive numbers.

### 4. Integers

{..., -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, ...} is the set of **integers**
<br> &rarr; The **natural numbers**, **negative numbers**, and **zero** make up the set of integers.

- An integer, such as 2, is also a rational number &rarr; 2 = 2/1

### 5. Rational Numbers

{x/x is a quotient of two integers, with denominator not equal to 0} is the set of **rational numbers**

- The set symbolism used in the definition of rational numbers: {x/x has a certain property} &rarr; Set-builder notation
- [Set-builder notation](https://www.cuemath.com/algebra/set-builder-notation/)
- [Set-builder notation(KR)](https://ko.wikipedia.org/wiki/%EC%A1%B0%EA%B1%B4%EC%A0%9C%EC%8B%9C%EB%B2%95)

### 6. Irrational Numbers

[Irrational numbers Image Link](https://dr282zn36sxxg.cloudfront.net/datastreams/f-d%3A6135a328362aee3038e9ccb838d7a943e17533a586ef80478b109a93%2BIMAGE_TINY%2BIMAGE_TINY.1)

{x/x is a number on the number line that is not rational} is the set of **irrational numbers**
<br> &rarr; Cannot be expressed as <u>a quotient of integers (a fraction of integer over integer)</u>

[Pi π](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pi)
<br> [Pi π Image Link](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/d3ffc6970dda2e60597854f14e2ac1e13a25a5cf)

### 7. Real Numbers

{x/x is a number that can be represented by a point on a number line} is the set of **real numbers**
<br> &rarr; Can be written as decimal numbers

- Rational numbers: Can be written as a decimal that will either come to end(terminate) or repeat in a fixed "block" of digits
  - Terminating decimals: 2/5 = 0.4
  - Repeating decimals: 3/11 = 0.2727272727......
- Irrational numbers: Neither terminates nor repeats

[Real number representation 1 Image Link](https://d138zd1ktt9iqe.cloudfront.net/media/seo_landing_files/real-numbers-1-1621595887.png)
<br> [Real number representation 2 Image Link](https://media.geeksforgeeks.org/wp-content/cdn-uploads/20210316135731/Real-Number-chart.jpg)

<br>

## Order in the Real Numbers

### 1. [Law of Trichotomy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_trichotomy)

For any real numbers A and B, one and only one of the following holds true
<br> {A = B, A < B, A > B}

[Inequality (Mathematics)](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inequality_(mathematics)>)

### 2. [Additive Inverse](https://byjus.com/maths/additive-inverse/) and Absolute Value

> **Additive Inverse**
>
> For any non-zero real number x, there is exactly one number on the number line the same distance from 0 as x but on the opposite side of 0
> <br> &rarr; {3, -3} is called **additive inverses**, **negatives**, or **opposites** of each other
>
> - The additive inverse of the number 0 is 0 itself
> - Double negative rule: For any number x, the following holds true &rarr; {-(-x) = x}

> **Absolute Value**
>
> [Absolute Value Image Link](https://files.realpython.com/media/abs_pieceswise.850458ee3c6a.png)
>
> - The absolute value of a real number can be defined as the undirected distance between 0 and the number on a number line
> - Read "the absolute value of x"
> - The absolute value of a number is never negative
> - The absolute value of 0 &rarr; 0

### 3. Applications of Real Numbers

- Interpreting Signed Numbers in a Table: Consumer Price Index (CPI)
- Comparing Occupational Rates of Change

<br>

## Exercise

### Section 6.1 &rarr; No. 1 ~ 11

Concept Check. Give a number that satisfies the given condition.

1. An integer between 4.5 and 5.5 &rarr; 5
2. A rational number between 2.8 and 2.9 &rarr; 2.85
3. A whole number that is not positive and is less than 1 &rarr; 0
4. A whole number greater than 4.5 &rarr; 5
5. An irrational number that is between Root 17 and Root 19 &rarr; Root 18
6. A real number that is neither negative nor positive &rarr; 0

Concept Check. Write true or false for each statement.

7. Every natural number is positive. &rarr; T
8. Every whole number is positive. &rarr; F
9. Every integer is a rational number. &rarr; T
10. Every rational number is a real number. &rarr; T

List all numbers from each set that are (a)natural numbers; (b)whole numbers; (c)integers; (d)rational numbers; (e)irrational numbers; (f)real numbers.

11. {-9, -Root 7, -1 and 1/4, -3/5, 0, Root 5, 3, 5.9, 7}
    - (a)natural numbers: 3, 7
    - (b)whole numbers: 0, 3, 7
    - (c)integers: 0, 3, 7, -9
    - (d)rational numbers: 0, 3, 7, -9, -1 and 1/4, -3/5, 5.9
    - (e)irrational numbers: -Root 7, Root 5
    - (f)real numbers: -9, -Root 7, -1 and 1/4, -3/5, 0, Root 5, 3, 5.9, 7

<br>

### Section 6.1 &rarr; No. 31 ~ 39 (Part b)

Concept Check.

31. Match each expression in Column I with its value in Column II. Some choices in Column II may not be used.
    <br> &rarr; Answer. (a)-A, (b)-A, (c)-B, (d)-B

Concept Check.

32. Fill in the blanks with the correct values:
    <br> &rarr; Answer. The opposite of -2 is [2], while the absolute value of -2 is [2]. The additive inverse of -2 is [2], while the additive inverse of the absolute value of -2 is [-2].

Find (a) the additive inverse (or opposite) of each number and (b) the absolute value of each number.

33. -2 &rarr; (a)2, (b)2
34. -8 &rarr; (a)8, (b)8
35. 6 &rarr; (a)-6, (b)6
36. 11 &rarr; (a)-11, (b)11
37. 7 - 4 &rarr; (a)-3, (b)3
38. 8 - 3 &rarr; (a)-5, (b)5
39. 7 - 7 &rarr; (a)0, (b)0

<br>

### Section 6.1 &rarr; No. 53 ~ 63 (odd)

Write true or false for each statement.

53. T
54. T
55. T
56. F
57. T
58. F

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
