---
title: "[Software-R] Unit 2: 2.3: Initiating Requirements Engineering Process"

categories:
  - Software-R
tags:
  - [Requirements, Process]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-06-01
last_modified_at: 2023-06-01
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Software Requirements Engng"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

# Initiating Requirements Engineering Process

Initiating Requirements Engineering Process

## Inception

1. Identify stakeholders
   : Stakeholders &rarr; "Are anyone who benefits in a direct or indirect way from the system which is being developed" [Sommerville and Soyer]
2. Types of Stakeholders
   : - Internal Stakeholders - persons within the organization
   : - External stakeholders - persons outside the organization
   : - Operational stakeholders - persons who regularly interact with the system
   : - Executive stakeholders - persons who don’t directly interact, but use the information or have financial interest
3. Recognize the existence of multiple stakeholder viewpoints
4. Work toward collaboration among stakeholders
5. These context-free questions focus on customer, stakeholders, overall goals, and benefits of the system
   : - Who is behind the request for work?
   : - Who will use the solution?
   : - What will be the economic benefit of a successful solution?
   : - Is there another source for the solution needed?
6. The next set of questions enable developer to better understand the problem and the customer’s perceptions of the solution
   : - How would you characterize good output form a successful solution?
   : - What problem(s) will this solution address?
   : - Can you describe the business environment in which the solution will be used?
   : - Will special performance constraints affect the way the solution is approached?
7. The final set of questions focuses on communication effectiveness:
   : - Are you the best person to give “official” answers to these questions?
   : - Are my questions relevant to your problem?
   : - Am I asking too many questions?
   : - Can anyone else provide additional information?
   : - Should I be asking you anything else?

It is important to ask the right question to the right person.{: .notice--danger}

<br>

## Elicitation (Requirements gathering)

Goal is to identify the problem, propose solution elements, negotiate approaches, and specify preliminary set of solutions requirements.

- Collaborative requirements gathering guidelines
  : - Meetings attended by both developers and customers
  : - Rules for preparation and participation are established
  : - Flexible agenda is used
  : - Facilitator controls the meeting (The facilitator can be a customer, developer, or an outsider)
  : - Definition mechanism (e.g. stickers, flip sheets, electronic bulletin board) used to gauge group consensus
- Elicitation work products (outputs)
  : 1. Statement of need and feasibility
  : 2. Bounded statement of scope for system or product
  : 3. List of stakeholders involved in requirements elicitation
  : 4. Description of system’s technical environment
  : 5. List of requirements organized by function and applicable domain constraints
  : 6. Set of usage scenarios (use-cases) that provide use insight into operation of deployed system
  : Each of these products is reviewed by all people who have participated in the `requirements elicitation`.
- Elicitation Problems
  : - Scope &rarr; system boundaries ill-defined
  : - Understanding &rarr; customers not sure what’s needed or can’t communicate it
  : - Volatility &rarr; requirements changes over time

<br>

## Requirements Elaboration

As requirements are gathered an over all vision of the system functions is developed. Looking at the work products of requirements elicitation further elaboration starts. The set of `usage scenarios (use-cases)` that provide use insight into operation of deployed system, is a very good starting point in understanding the `functionality` of the required software and from there as we will see in usage scenarios once elaborated and discussed further analysis models can constructed such as information based class models, behavioral models describing the dynamic nature of the software, etc.

<br>

## Negotiating Requirements

It is likely you will end up with a list of functional and non-functional requirements, especially when the scope is to develop a large system/software application involving many stakeholders. Usually the number of resources available for development is not enough, so it is key to negotiate with the stakeholders and reach to a prioritized list of requirements.

The Intent is to develop a project plan that meets stakeholder needs and real-world constraints (time, people, budget) placed on the software team.

- Negotiation activities
  : - Identification of system key stakeholders
  : - Determination of stakeholders’ “win conditions”
  : - Negotiate to reconcile stakeholders’ win conditions into `“win-win”` result for all stakeholders (including developers)
- Goal is to produce a Win-Win result before proceeding to subsequent software engineering activities.

<br>

## Requirements Validation

As a means to validate requirements, ask the following questions:

- Is each requirement consistent with overall project or system objective?
- Are all requirements specified at the appropriate level off abstraction?
- Is each requirement essential to system objective or is it an add-on feature?
- Is each requirement bounded and unambiguous?
- Do you know the source for each requirement?
- Do requirements conflict with one another?
- Is each requirement achievable in the technical environment that will house the system or product?
- Is each requirement testable once implemented?
- Does the requirements model reflect the information, function, and behavior of the system to be built?
- Has the requirements model been partitioned in a way that exposes more detailed system information progressively?
- Have all the requirements patterns been properly validated and are they consistent with customer requirements?

<br>

## Agile Elicitation Techniques

Within the context of an agile process, requirements are elicited by asking all stakeholders to create user stories. Each user story describes a simple system requirement written from the user’s perspective. User stories can be written on small note cards, making it easy for developers to select and manage a subset of requirements to implement for the next product increment.

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
