---
title: "[Software-R] Unit 2: 2.6: Analysis Model"

categories:
  - Software-R
tags:
  - [Analysis Model]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-06-01
last_modified_at: 2023-06-01
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Software Requirements Engng"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

# Working towards Collaboration between Stakeholders

Working towards Collaboration between Stakeholders

## Prioritizing Requirements

The job of a requirements engineer is to identify `areas of commonality` (i.e.,requirements on which all stakeholders agree) and `areas of conflict or inconsistency` (i.e., requirements that are desired by one stakeholder but conflict with the needs of another stakeholder).

This is not an easy task, especially in large projects where stakeholders come from different backgrounds.

Let us say for example, if five stakeholders are involved in a software project, you may have five (or more) different opinions about the proper set of requirements. Usually, stakeholders should collaborate among themselves and with the software engineers to reach a consensuses about requirements in order to achieve a successful product.

The setup differs per project sometimes there are committees and sometimes there is a project champion may make the final decision.

Also may techniques have been developed to prioritize requirements, for example the "Planning Poker" , "MoSCoW"..etc. and sometime the software engineers carrying out the role of a requirements engineer need to arrange with the project manager to implement theses techniques.

Below some more information on the "Planning Poker" technique mentioned in your text book.

`Planning poker`, also called `Scrum poker` :

One way of resolving conflicting requirements and at the same time better understanding the relative importance of all requirements is to use a “voting” scheme based on priority points. All stakeholders are provided with some number of priority points that can be “spent” on any number of requirements. A list of requirements is presented, and each stakeholder indicates the relative importance of each (from his or her viewpoint) by spending one or more priority points on it. Points spent cannot be reused. Once a stakeholder’s priority points are exhausted, no further action on requirements can be taken by that person. Overall points spent on each requirement by all stakeholders provide an indication of the overall importance of each requirement.

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
