---
title: "[Software-R] Unit 4: 4.3: Developing Use Cases"

categories:
  - Software-R
tags:
  - [Use Cases]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-06-21
last_modified_at: 2023-06-21
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Software Requirements Engng"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

# Developing Use Cases

A `use case` tells a stylized story about how an end user (playing one of a number of possible roles) interacts with the system under a specific set of circumstances. The story may be:

- Narrative text
- Outline of tasks or interactions
- A template-based description
- A diagrammatic representation

Regardless of its form, a use case depicts the software or `system from the end user’s point of view.`

A use case is a `contract for behavior` [Alistair Cockburn].

The `contract` defines the way in which an actor uses a computer-based system to accomplish some goal.

`Use cases` are defined from an actor’s point of view. An actor is a role that people (users) or devices play as they interact with the software.

<br>

# Actors

Actors are the external entities that interact with the system.

An actor may be:

- People(role)
- Computer hardware and devices
- External systems

There are two types of actors:

- Primary actors
  : Are those who use the system's main functions, deriving benefits from it directly.
  : - Primary actors are completely outside the system and drive the system requirements.
  : - Primary actors use the system to achieve an observable user goal.
- Secondary actors
  : Play a supporting role to facilitate the primary actors to achieve their goals.
  : - Secondary actors often appear to be more inside the system than outside.
  : - Secondary actors are usually allocated many system requirements that are not derived directly from the statement of requirements.
  : - Secondary actors support the system so that primary actors can do their work.
  : - Secondary actors do not always get identified in the first iteration.

<br>

# Developing Use-Cases

Each use-case tells stylized story about how end-users interact with the system under a specific set of circumstances.

A use case is named as Verb Noun.

For example, below are some use case names:

- Place Order
- Subscribe to services
- Fill shopping cart
- Empty shopping cart

## Steps to Develop a Use Case

- First step is to identify `actors`(people or devices) that use the system in the context of the function and behavior of the system to be described.
  : Operational Stakeholders
- Who are the primary(interact with each other) or secondary(support system) actors?
- What are the actor's `goals`?
  : This is important, there might be steps and functions the actor does, such as `Login to system` that need to be developed for a new software system. Let's say an app to order pizza, but it `Login to system` a user goal? Not really, the user goal is to `Order pizza`.
- What preconditions must exist before story begins?
- What are the main tasks or functions performed by each actor?
- What exceptions might be considered as the story is described?
- What variations in actor interactions are possible?
- What system information will the actor acquire, produce, or change?
- Will the actor need to inform the system about external environment changes?
- What information does the actor desire from the system?
- Does the actor need to be informed about unexpected changes?
- Next step is to elaborate the basic use case to provide a more detailed description needed to populate a use-case template.

In answering all of the above questions, the answers could be inserted into a template called the use case template.

<br>

# Use-case template

| Column Title     | Description                                                                                    |
| :--------------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Use case name    | Expressed as `Verb Noun`                                                                       |
| Primary actor(s) |                                                                                                |
| Goal in context  | What does the actor wish to achieve                                                            |
| Preconditions    | The precondition describes what is known to be true before the use case is initiated           |
| Trigger          | Identifies the event or condition that `gets the use case started`                             |
| Scenario details | Lists the specific actions that are required by the actor and the appropriate system responses |
| Exceptions       | Identify the situations uncovered as the preliminary use case is refined                       |
| Priority         | High, Medium, Low                                                                              |
| When available   | Which iteration                                                                                |
| Frequency of use | Frequent or Infrequent                                                                         |
| Channel to actor | How will actor access toe functionality                                                        |

- Secondary actors
- Channels to Secondary actors
- Open issues - Optional

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
