---
title: "[Software-R] Unit 4: Scenario-based Models"

categories:
  - Software-R
tags:
  - [Scenario-based]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-06-05
last_modified_at: 2023-06-05
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Software Requirements Engng"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

# Learning Outcomes

Written words are wonderful vehicles for communications but are not necessarily the best way to represent software requirements. "Requirements modelling" also known as "Analysis modelling" uses a combination of text and diagrams to depict requirements in a way that is relatively easy to understand, and more important, straightforward to review for correctness, completeness, and consistency.

To validate software requirements, you need to examine them from a number of different points of view. In this unit you’ll consider "Requirements modeling" from a scenario-based perspective and examine how UML can be used to supplement the scenarios. In units 5,6 & 7 you’ll learn about other “dimensions” of the requirements model.

By examining a number of different dimensions, you’ll increase the probability that errors will be found, that inconsistencies will surface, and that omissions will be uncovered.

1. Explain Analysis models, objectives and rules of thumb.
2. Explain Domain analysis and object-oriented domain analysis.
3. Explain steps for developing use cases.
4. Describe UML models and standards for use case workflows (activity diagrams and swim-lane diagrams).
5. Analyze elicited requirements and develop textual descriptions for use cases for the project domain problem/opportunity.
6. Analyze elicited requirements and develop use case models and activity diagrams for the project domain problem/opportunity.

<br>

# Key Terms and Concepts

1. Activity Diagram
   : In Unified Modeling Language (UML), an activity diagram is a graphical representation of an executed set of procedural system activities and considered a state chart diagram variation
2. Domain Analysis
   : Software domain analysis is the identification, analysis, and specification of common requirements from a specific application domain, typically for reuse on multiple projects within that application domain
3. Formal Use Case
   : Structured textual representation of a use case
4. Requirements Analysis
   : Are the actions carried out to write the specification of software's operational characteristics, the identification of software's interface with other systems and the constraints that software must meet
5. Requirements Modeling
   : Requirements modeling process uses a combination of text and diagrams to represent software requirements (data, function, and behavior) in an understandable way
6. Scenario-based Modeling
   : Makes use of use cases to capture the ways in which end-users will interact with the system
7. Swimlane Diagram
   : Variation of activity diagrams used show flow of activities in use case as well as indicating which actor has responsibility for activity rectangle actions
8. Sub-system
   : A part of the system

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
