---
title: "[Software-R] Unit 4: 4.4: Developing Textual Descriptions"

categories:
  - Software-R
tags:
  - [Textual Description]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-06-21
last_modified_at: 2023-06-21
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Software Requirements Engng"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

# Developing Textual Descriptions

In developing a textual model, you might wonder about the following:

## 1. What should we write about?

- Inception and elicitation - provide you with the information you’ll need to begin writing use cases.
- Requirements gathering meetings, and other requirements engineering mechanisms are used to:
  : - identify stakeholders
  : - define the scope of the problem
  : - specify overall operational goals
  : - establish priorities
  : - outline all known functional requirements, and
  : - describe the things (objects) that will be manipulated by the system.
- To begin developing a set of use cases, list the functions or activities performed by a specific actor.

## 2. How much should we write about it?

- As further conversations with the stakeholders progress, the requirements gathering team develops use cases for each of the functions noted.
- In general, use cases are written first in an informal narrative fashion.
- If more formality is required, the same use case is rewritten using a structured format similar to the one mentioned in Topic 4.3.

## 3. How detailed should we make our description?

- It really depends on the nature and size of the project.

## 4. How should we organize the description?

- Use the template mentioned in section 4.3.

<br>

## Reviewing a Use-Case

- Use-cases are written first in narrative form and mapped to a template if formality is needed
- Each preliminary scenario should be reviewed and refined to see if alternative interactions are possible
  : - Can the actor take some other action at this point?
  : - Is it possible that the actor will encounter an error condition at some point? If so, what?
  : - Is it possible that the actor will encounter some other behavior at some point? If so, what?

## Exceptions

- Describe situations (failures or user choices) that cause the system to exhibit unusual behavior
- Brainstorming should be used to derive a reasonably complete set of exceptions for each use case
- Are there cases where a validation function occurs for the use case?
  : - Are there cases where a supporting function (actor) fails to respond appropriately?
  : - Can poor system performance result in unexpected or improper use actions?
- Handling exceptions may require the creation of additional use cases

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
