---
title: "[Software-R] Unit 2: Check of Your Understanding"

categories:
  - Software-R
tags:
  - []

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-06-01
last_modified_at: 2023-06-01
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Software Requirements Engng"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

## 1. During project inception the intent of the of the tasks are to determine. Select all that apply.

- `basic problem understanding`.
- `nature of the solution needed`.
- `people who want a solution`.
- none of the above.

## 2. Which of the following is not one of the context-free questions that would be used during project inception?

- What will be the economic benefit from a god solution?
- Who is behind the request for work?
- `Who will pay for the solution?`
- Who will use the solution?

## 3. Of the following statements, which is the BEST answer to the following question: What might cause a situation to occur where it becomes necessary to negotiate the requirements of the software engineering activities?

- Where the customer changes his or her mind and decides that it is important to make changes to the project.
- Where changes in outside entities cause a need for changes within the software environment.
- `Where the original requirements were incorrectly conceived or where changes during the development process cause a change to be needed in order to proceed.`
- Where team members cannot decide on the best development pathway forward.

## 4. The result of the requirements engineering task is an analysis model that defines which of the following problem domain(s)?

- Information
- Functional
- Behavioral
- `All of the above`

## 5. Requirements engineering is a generic process that does not vary from one software project to another.

- `True`
- False

## 6. A stakeholder is anyone who will purchase the completed software system under development.

- True
- `False`

## 7. Non-functional requirements can be safely ignored in modern software development projects.

- True
- `False`

## 8. Which of the following is NOT part of requirements monitoring.

- Run-time validation
- Business activity monitoring
- `Negotiation redesign`
- Distributed debugging

## 9. Developers and customers create use-cases to help the software team understand how different classes of end-users will use functions.

- `True`
- False

## 10. Analysis patterns facilitate the transformation of the analysis model into a design model by suggesting reliable solutions to common problems.

- `True`
- False

<br>

## Summary

- The importance of requirements engineering and the work products of requirements engineering which is a written understanding of the problem.
- The work products may include:
  : - Usage scenarios
  : - Function
  : - Feature lists
  : - Requirements models
- The difference between functional and non functional requirements that might be gathered.
- The main steps and tasks of requirements engineering:
  : - Requirements engineering begins with inception (a task that defines the scope and nature of the problem to be solved).
  : - It moves onward to elicitation (a task that helps stakeholders define what is required).
  : - And then elaboration (where basic requirements are refined and modified).
  : - As stakeholders define the problem, negotiation occurs (what are the priorities, what is essential, when is it required?).
  : - Finally, the problem is specified in some manner and then reviewed or validated to ensure that your understanding of the problem and the stakeholders’ understanding of the problem coincide.

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
