---
title: "[Software-R] Unit 3: Check of Your Understanding"

categories:
  - Software-R
tags:
  - [Understanding]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-06-01
last_modified_at: 2023-06-01
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Software Requirements Engng"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

## 1. How effective have review techniques been in uncovering errors according to the software engineering industry?

- `Up to 75%`
- Up to 50%
- Up to 85%
- Up to 100%

## 2. The goal of software quality control is to remove quality problems in the software. The problems are COMMONLY known by which of the following names?

- Infections, faults, or mistakes
- Viruses, errors, or defects
- Bugs, infections, errors, or mistakes
- `Bugs, faults, errors, or defects`

## 3. Looking at review metrics and their use, which of the following answer BEST matches the following question Preparation effort, Ep.

- `The effort (in person-hours) required to review a work product prior to the actual review meeting.`
- The effort (in person-hours) that is expended during the actual review.
- The effort (in person-hours) that is dedicated to the correction of those errors uncovered during the review.
- Represents the sum of effort measures for reviews.
- None of the above.

## 4. Looking at review metrics and their use, which of the following answer BEST matches the following question:Rework effort, Er

- The effort (in person-hours) required to review a work product prior to the actual review meeting.
- The effort (in person-hours) that is expended during the actual review.
- `The effort (in person-hours) that is dedicated to the correction of those errors uncovered during the review.`
- Represents the sum of effort measures for reviews.

## 5. A formal technical review is a software quality control activity performed by software engineers. Which of the following is NOT part of the review process?

- Uncover errors in function, logic, or implementation for any representation of the software.
- Ensure that the software has been represented according to predefined standards.
- `Confirm that the application is extendable.`
- Make projects more manageable.

## 6. Which of the following is NOT part of the agile review process?

- Scrum meetings are used to review and order tasks according to priority.
- `Developers use documentation to review tasks.`
- Agile developers used pairs programming.
- Code producers walk through user stories.

## 7. Fill in the blanks. [______________] is defined as the probability of failure-free software operation for a specified time-period in a specified environment.

- Software error
- `Software reliability`
- Software quality
- Software effectiveness

## 8. The ISO quality assurance standard that applies to software engineering is?

- ISO 9000
- ISO 9001a
- ISO 9002
- `ISO 9001:2015`

## 9. Looking at the elements of software quality assurance, which of the following is NOT part of group?

- Education
- Standards
- Reviews and audits
- `Programming`

## 10. Which of the following attributes is NOT an attribute that the SQA process should control/measure for a requirements engineering model?

- Ambiguity
- Understandability
- `Patterns`
- Traceability

<br>

## Summary

- Understand the value of having clear and realistic requirements specifications that can be traced to the software products.
- How we can conduct a software review at the level of the requirements and what are the metrics that we should look at.
- The reviews fall under the umbrella activity of Technical reviews which is one of the main software quality assurance tasks that should be planned for early in the project and should not be left till after coding.
- The intent of every technical review is to find errors and uncover issues that would have a negative impact on the software to be deployed.
- The sooner an error is uncovered and corrected, the less likely that error will propagate to other software engineering work products and amplify itself, resulting in significantly more effort to correct it.
- In software quality assurance (SAQ) which we strive to control the quality of the software product to meet the initial requirements and specifications.
- The software quality assurance is applied at each step of the software process including the requirements. We also focused on the requirements engineering quality attributes and the related metrics to each attribute.

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
