---
title: "[Software-R] Unit 2: 2.5: Working Towards Collaboration Between Stakeholders"

categories:
  - Software-R
tags:
  - [Collaboration, Stakeholder]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-06-01
last_modified_at: 2023-06-01
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Software Requirements Engng"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

# Functional vs. Non-functional Requirements

System requirements, in-line with customer needs, are the ultimate goal. System requirements can be classified into two categories:

## Functional Requirements (FR)

They reflect `what` the system must perform from the user perspective; they reflect business uses and functions the users carry out.

Example:

Let us say that we needed to develop a new App that will be used to solve the issues of booking tickets for a theater. Currently, the only way to purchase tickets today is to at the theater door or at theater partners (small shops), this causing the theater to loose business opportunities. The top management decided to make available purchasing tickets, online, some initial functional requirements might emerge as follows:

1. Users must be able to browse for plays by name or date or venue.
2. Searching for plays by keywords should also be possible.
3. User will select ticket price from those offered and also specify the number of tickets they require.
4. Users must be able to choose their seats
5. The new app should allow for cancelling reservations up to 24 hours before the play starts without penalties.
6. The new system should accept both debit and credit card payments

<br>

## Non-functional Requirements (NFR)

They `place constraints` on `how` the system will do. Non-functional requirements are often called `quality attributes` of a system. These define `other system characteristics` such as `quality, performance, or security` attributes or general system constraints. Usually, these are collected during requirements engineering elicitation and elaboration tasks and by referring to ISO standards, further work is done on them during design especially at the architecture level.

Coming back to our "Online theater booking tickets" example mentioned above, below are some examples of non-functional requirements, that might emerge during the elicitation and elaboration tasks:

1. All data is to be backed up automatically twice a day
2. The system must be available 24 by 7
3. All stored customer credit cards numbers must be encrypted
4. Ticket booking should happen within a time interval of maximum 5 seconds

Some more examples of areas of non-functional requirements NFR, are presented in the below table:

| NFR           |                                                  |                                                                                 |                                                                                     |
| :------------ | :----------------------------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Accessibility | Backup                                           | Security                                                                        | Integrability (ability to integrate components)                                     |
| Adaptability  | Data retention                                   | Maintainability (Mean time to repair)                                           | Resource constraints (processor speed, memory, disk space, network bandwidth, etc.) |
| Availability  | Data integrity                                   | Reliability (e.g. Mean Time Between/To Failures - MTBF/MTTF )                   | Response time                                                                       |
| Capacity      | Elasticity                                       | Fault tolerance (e.g. Operational System Monitoring, Measuring, and Management) | Throughput (처리량)                                                                 |
| Certification | Efficiency (resource consumption for given load) | Privacy (compliance to privacy laws)                                            | Reporting                                                                           |

All NFR must be testable, i.e. measurable for example, if the requirement states: "The system should be fast" the requirements needs to be redefined to reflect how fast in a quantitative manner. Another example if the requirement state "The system should be user friendly" the requirements needs to be redefined to reflect what exactly is meant by user friendly in a manner that can be tested.

{% capture notice-2 %}

Important!

If developers focus on functional requirements and ignore NFR’s, `they risk` creating software that is `not useful and may be unusable`.
{% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div>

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
