---
title: "[Software-R] Unit 3: Requirements Engineering (part 2)"

categories:
  - Software-R
tags:
  - [Requirements Engineering]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-06-01
last_modified_at: 2023-06-01
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Software Requirements Engng"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

# Learning Outcomes

1. Explain the concept of traceability in software engineering and the definition of traceability matrices.
2. Explain the definition of software quality and discuss the main factors involved in software quality
3. Discuss the the metrics for software quality assurance at the level of the requirements model
4. Explain the concept of technical reviews and its relation to requirements validation.
5. Explain the steps and metrics involved in technical reviews
6. Explain the concept of analysis patterns.

<br>

# Key Terms and Concepts

1. Defect
   : A quality problem found only after the software has been released to end users or other stakeholders.
2. Error
   : A quality problem found only before the software has been released to end users or other stakeholders.
3. Software Review
   : Software reviews are a Filter for the software process.
4. Analysis Patterns
   : Suggest solutions (a class, a function, or a behavior) that can be reused when modeling future applications.
5. Traceability
   : Is a software engineering term that that refers to documented links between software engineering work products.
6. Traceability Matrix
   : A Traceability matrix allows a requirements engineer to relate requirements to other software other software engineering products such as test cases, code...etc. Rows of the traceability matrix express requirements. Columns of the traceability matrix describe the working products of the software engineering for example a use case, design element, test case related to the traceability matrix.
7. Software Quality
   : An effective software process applied in a manner that creates a useful product that provides measurable value for those who produce it and those who use it.
8. Software Quality Assurance
   : Is a planned and systematic pattern of actions that are required to ensure high quality in software.

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
