---
title: "[Software-R] Unit 4: Check of Your Understanding"

categories:
  - Software-R
tags:
  - [Understanding]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-06-21
last_modified_at: 2023-06-21
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Software Requirements Engng"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

## 1. Primary actors interact to achieve required system function and derive the intended benefit from the system.They work directly and frequently with the software. What are secondary actors?

- Secondary actors are often only found during further investigation and added to the system
- Secondary actors are not considered as important as primary actors.
- `Secondary actors support the system so that primary actors can do their work.`
- Secondary actors represent the customers and end users.

## 2. What is meant by the term “trigger” when referring to software engineering use cases?

- `The trigger identifies the event or condition that starts the use case`
- The trigger is used to show a pathway from the event to a condition to start
- The trigger is a precondition that describes what is known to be true
- The trigger lists the specific actions that are required by the actor and the appropriate system responses

## 3. Which of the following BEST explains the use of the UML activity diagrams?

- `The UML activity diagram supplements the use case by providing a graphical representation of the flow of interaction within a specific scenario.`
- The UML activity diagram uses a computer-based tool to develop activity maps.
- A UML activity diagram only displays top-level flows within a scenario.
- A UML activity diagram is used instead of a typical use case as it shows a graphical representation of the flow with a scenario.
- None of the above.

## 4. Alistair Cockburn characterizes a use case as a “contract for behavior.” What does contract mean here? Select all that apply.

- `Contract defines the way in which an actor uses a computer-based system to accomplish some goal.`
- Contract defines the way in which an actor uses an aspect-oriented system to accomplish some goal.
- `Contract defines the way in which an actor uses an object-oriented system to accomplish some goal.`
- Contract defines the way in which an actor uses a data-oriented system to accomplish some goal.

## 5. In order to derive a reasonably complete set of exceptions for each use case, what does Cockburn recommend?

- A flowchart
- Thinking
- `Brainstorming`
- A scenario

## 6. In the formal approach for writing a use case, what does a goal in context identify?

- It identifies the event or condition that gets the use case started.
- It identifies the specific actions that are required by the actor and the appropriate system responses.
- It identifies what is known to be true before the use case is initiated.
- `It identifies the overall scope of the use case.`

## 7. In a formal use case, a [_____] describes what is known to be true before the use case is initiated.

- scenario
- `precondition`
- trigger
- goal in context

## 8. Use cases within the software engineering project tells a story about how the end user interacts with the system. What would be the first step in developing a use case?

- The first step would be to develop the story.
- `The first step would be to define the actors.`
- The first step would be to define the roles.
- The first step would be to determine communication.

## 9. Identify the limitations of a use case scenario. Select all that apply.

- A use case can be inappropriate to define functional requirements
- `A use case can be inappropriate for nonfunctional requirements.`
- A use case cannot be used to describe behavioral requirements
- `A use case cannot be used when significant detail precision is required`

## 10. A(n) [________] captures the interactions that occur between producers and consumers of information within the system itself.

- Workflow
- `Use case`
- Swimlane diagram
- State diagram

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
