---
title: "[Software-R] Unit 1: Check of Your Understanding"

categories:
  - Software-R
tags:
  - [Understanding]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-06-01
last_modified_at: 2023-06-01
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Software Requirements Engng"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

## 1. Software deteriorates rather than wears out because

- Software suffers from exposure to hostile environments
- Defects are more likely to arise after software has been used often
- `Multiple change requests introduce errors in component interactions`
- Software spare parts become harder to order

## 2. Which of the following items listed below is not one of the software engineering layers?

- Process
- `Manufacturing`
- Methods
- Tools

## 3. Which of these are standards for assessing software processes? Select all that apply.

- SEI
- `SPICE`
- ISO9000
- `ISO9001`

## 4. The waterfall model of software development is

- `A reasonable approach when requirements are well defined.`
- A good approach when a working program is required quickly.
- The best approach to use for projects with large development teams.
- An old-fashioned model that is rarely used any more.

## 5. The prototyping model of software development is

- A reasonable approach when requirements are well defined.
- `A useful approach when a customer cannot define requirements clearly.`
- The best approach to use for projects with large development teams.
- A risky model that rarely produces a meaningful product.

## 6. Evolutionary software process models

- Are iterative in nature.
- Can easily accommodate product requirements changes.
- Do not generally produce throwaway systems.
- `All of the above.`

## 7. In its simplest form an external computing device may access cloud data services using a web browser.

- `True`
- False

## 8. Product line software development depends on the reuse of existing software components to provide software engineering leverage.

- `True`
- False

## 9. In agile process models the only deliverable work product is the working program.

- True
- `False`

## 10. A good software development team always uses the same task set for every project to insure high quality work products.

- True
- `False`

## 11. How do you create agile processes to manage unpredictability? Select all that apply.

- Requirements gathering must be conducted very carefully
- Risk analysis must be conducted before planning takes place
- `Software increments must be delivered in short time period`
- `Software processes must adapt to changes incrementally`

## 12. Agile Modeling (AM) provides guidance to practitioner during which of these software tasks? Select all that apply.

- `Analysis`
- `Design`
- Coding
- Testing

## 13. Which of the following are valid reasons for collecting customer feedback concerning delivered software?

- Allows developers to make changes to the delivered increment
- Delivery schedule can be revised to reflect changes
- Developers can identify changes to incorporate into next increment
- `All of the above`

## 14. Requirements models depict software in which three domains?

- Architecture, interface, component
- Cost, risk, schedule
- `Information, function, behavior`
- None of the above

## 15. Which of the following is not one of core principles of software engineering practice?

- All design should be as simple as possible, but no simpler.
- A software system exists only to provide value to its users.
- `Pareto principle (20% of any product requires 80% of the effort).`
- Remember that you produce others will consume.

## 16. In agile development it is more important to build software that meets the customer's needs today than worry about features that might be needed in the future.

- `True`
- False

## 17. Software engineering principles have about a three-year half-life.

- True
- `False`

## 18. The agile view of iterative customer communication and collaboration is applicable to all software engineering practice.

- `True`
- False

## 19. The design model should be traceable to the requirements model.

- `True`
- False

## 20. Teams using agile software practices do not generally create models.

- True
- `False`

<br>

## Summary

- The road-map to building high quality software products is software process.
- Software processes are adapted to meet the needs of software engineers and managers as they undertake the development of a software product.
- A software process provides a framework for managing activities that can very easily get out of control.
- Modern software processes must be agile, demanding only those activities, controls, and work products appropriate for team or product.
- Different types of projects require different software processes.
- The software engineer's work products (programs, documentation, data) are produced as consequences of the activities defined by the software process.
- The best indicators of how well a software process has worked are the quality, timeliness, and long-term viability of the resulting software product.

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
