---
title: "[Software-R] Unit 2: Requirements Engineering (part 1)"

categories:
  - Software-R
tags:
  - [Requirements Engineering]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-06-01
last_modified_at: 2023-06-01
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Software Requirements Engng"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

# Learning Outcomes

Many software projects fail not because of poor coding or poor design, but because requirements were not clearly understood and what is delivered does not match what the customer had in mind. Understanding the requirements of a problem is among the most difficult tasks that face a software engineer. Designing and building an elegant computer program that solves the wrong problem serves no one’s needs.

When you first think about it, developing a clear understanding of requirements doesn’t seem that hard. After all, doesn’t the customer know what is required? Shouldn’t the end users have a good understanding of the features and functions that will provide benefit? Surprisingly, in many instances the answer to these questions is “no.” And even if customers and end users are explicit in their needs, those needs will change throughout the project.

1. Explain "Requirements Engineering" and what are the underlying concepts and tasks that lead to good requirements analysis.
2. Explain each of the requirements engineering Tasks: Inception, Elicitation, Elaboration, Negotiation, Specification, Requirements validation, Requirements management.
3. Describe the difference between functional and non-functional requirements.
4. Describe requirements elicitation techniques.
5. Explain the quality function deployment (QFD) technique.
6. Understand the elements of an analysis model.
7. Explain why identifying users' stories and use cases is the key to defining functional requirements.
8. Apply requirements engineering techniques to identify use cases.
9. Describe UML models and standards for scenario-based models.

<br>

# Key Terms and Concepts

1. Elaboration:
   : Focuses on developing a refined technical model of software function, behavior, and information.
2. Inception:
   : Software engineers use context-free questions to establish a basic understanding of the problem, the people who want a solution, the nature of the solution, and the effectiveness of the collaboration between customers and developers.
3. Negotiation:
   : Requirements are categorized and organized into subsets, relations among requirements identified, requirements reviewed for correctness, requirements prioritized based on customer needs. The goal of negotiation is to reach a win-win situation with the customer.
4. Requirements Engineering:
   : Helps software engineers better understand the problem they are trying to solve. The intent of requirements engineering is to provide a written understanding of the customers problem. It is a process of 7 tasks.
5. Requirements Elicitation:
   : Requirements elicitation is the process of collecting and refining stakeholder requirements. Projects are garbage-in-garbage-out meaning that poor quality requirements typically lead to project issues and failures.
6. Requirements Management:
   : Activities that help project team to identify, control, and track requirements and changes as project proceeds
7. Requirements Monitoring:
   : Application monitoring is a process that ensures that a ... Typically, application monitoring provides runtime metrics of system
8. Specification:
   : Written work products produced describing the function, performance, and development constraints for a computer-based system.
9. Use case:
   : A use case tells a stylized story about how an end user (playing one of a number of possible roles) interacts with the system under a specific set of circumstances. The story may be narrative text, an outline of tasks or interactions, a template-based description, or a diagrammatic representation. Regardless of its form, a use case depicts the software or system from the end user’s point of view.
10. Volatility:
    : Occur when the requirements change over time

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
