---
title: "[Software-R] Unit 1: Introduction to Software Engineering - Key Terms"

categories:
  - Software-R
tags:
  - [Software]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-05-13
last_modified_at: 2023-05-13
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Software Requirements Engng"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

# Learning Outcomes

1. Discuss the evolving nature of software.
2. Define the terms software, Legacy Software, software engineering.
3. Describe the seven broad categories of software engineering practice.
4. Describe the evolving categories of software: Web apps, Mobile applications, Cloud computing, product line software.
5. Explain the five generic process framework activities: communication, planning, modeling, construction, deployment.
6. Describe the software engineering umbrella activities.
7. Discuss the types of process flows: linear, iterative, evolutionary.
8. Discuss Process Assessment and Improvement standards.
9. Explain the various software process models: Waterfall, V-shape, . Incremental, prototype, spiral, concurrent, unified, component based, personal and team based.
10. Discuss various options for software engineering team setup.

<br>

# Key Terms and Concepts

1. Software:
   : Instructions (computer programs) that when executed provide de- sired features, function, and performance;Data structures that enable the programs to adequately manipulate information.descriptive information in both hard copy and virtual forms that describes the operation and use of the programs.
2. Software Engineering:
   : The application of a systematic, disciplined, quantifiable approach to the development, operation, and maintenance of software; that is, the application of engineering to software.
3. Generic Process Model:
   : There are five generic process framework activities:
   : Communication, Planning, Modeling, Construction, Deployment.
4. Cloud Computing:
   : Encompasses an infrastructure or “ecosystem” that enables any user, anywhere, to use a computing device to share computing resources on a broad scale.
5. Process:
   : It's a collection of activities, actions and tasks carried out when some work product is required.
6. Component-based Development:
   : Component-based development (CBD) is a procedure that accentuates the design and development of computer-based systems with the help of reusable software components. With CBD, the focus shifts from software programming to software system composing.
7. Web Apps:
   : Software domain that provides computing capability along with informational content over the internet.
8. Activity:
   : Strives to achieve a broad objective and is applied regardless of the application domain, size of the project, complexity of the effort, or degree of rigor with which software engineering is to be applied.(e.g., communication with stakeholders).
9. Process Flow:
   : A software process (also knows as software methodology) is a set of related activities that leads to the production of the software. These activities may involve the development of the software from the scratch, or, modifying an existing system.
10. Legacy Software:
    : Legacy software systems were developed decades ago and have been continually modified to meet changes in business requirements and computing platforms. The proliferation of such systems is causing headaches for large organizations who find them costly to maintain and risky to evolve.
11. Action:
    : Encompasses a set of tasks that produce a major work product (e.g., an architectural model).
12. Process Improvement:
    : Process Improvement is the proactive task of identifying, analyzing and improving upon existing business processes within an organization for optimization and to meet new quotas or standards of quality. It often involves a systematic approach which follows a specific methodology but there are different approaches to be considered.
13. Evolutionary Process Model:
    : Following are the evolutionary process models.The prototyping modelThe spiral modelConcurrent development model.
14. Mobile Apps:
    : Allows a mobile device to gain access to web-based content via a browser that has been specifically designed to accommodate the strengths and weaknesses of the mobile platform.
15. Task:
    : Focuses on a small, but well-defined objective (e.g., conducting a unit test) that produces a tangible outcome.
16. Taskset:
    : Taskset is used to set or retrieve the CPU affinity of a running process given its PID or to launch a new COMMAND with a given CPU affinity. CPU affinity is a scheduler property that 'bonds' a process to a given set of CPUs on the system.
17. Formal Methods Model:
    : Formal methods are techniques used to model complex systems as mathematical entities. By building a mathematically rigorous model of a complex system, it is possible to verify the system's properties in a more thorough fashion than empirical testing.
18. Product Line Software:
    : A set of software-intensive systems that share a common, managed set of features satisfying the specific needs of a particular market segment or mission and that are developed from a common set of core assets in a prescribed way.
19. Incremental Process Models:
    : Incremental process model is also know as Successive version model.First, a simple working system implementing only a few basic features is built and then that is delivered to the customer. Then thereafter many successive iterations/ versions are implemented and delivered to the customer until the desired system is realized.
20. Prototyping:
    : Software prototyping is the activity of creating prototypes of software applications, i.e., incomplete versions of the software program being developed. It is an activity that can occur in software development and is comparable to prototyping as known from other fields, such as mechanical engineering or manufacturing.
21. Spiral Model:
    : Spiral model is one of the most important Software Development Life Cycle models, which provides support for Risk Handling. In its diagrammatic representation, it looks like a spiral with many loops. The exact number of loops of the spiral is unknown and can vary from project to project.
22. Unified Process:
    : The unified is an attempt to draw on the best features and characteristics of traditional software process models, but characterize them in a way that implements many of the best principles of agile software development.
23. V-model:
    : In software development, the V-model[2] represents a development process that may be considered an extension of the waterfall model, and is an example of the more general V-model. Instead of moving down in a linear way.
24. Waterfall Model:
    : The waterfall model is a relatively linear sequential design approach for certain areas of engineering design. In software development, it tends to be among the less iterative and flexible approaches, as progress flows in largely one direction ('downwards' like a waterfall) through the phases of conception, initiation, analysis, design, construction, testing, deployment and maintenance.

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
