about/index.md, before:


- [Principal investigator](#Principal-Investigator)
- [Post-doctoral researchers](#Post-doctoral-researchers)
  * [Anna Marzecova](#Anna-Marzecova)
  * [Cristian Buc Calderon](#Cristian-Buc-Calderon)
  * [Elise Lesage](#Elise-Lesage)
  * [Esther De Loof](#Esther-De-Loof)
  * [Jacki Janowich](#Jacki-Janowich)
  * [Kobe Desender](#Kobe-Desender)
  * [Mehdi Senoussi](#Mehdi-Senoussi)
- [PhD students](#PhD-students)
  * [Kate Ergo](#Kate-Ergo)
  * [Pieter Huycke](#Pieter-Huycke)
  * [Pieter Verbeke](#Pieter-Verbeke)
- [Visiting researchers](#Visiting-researchers)
  * [Fabrice Luyckx](#Fabrice-Luyckx)
- [Internship students](#Internship-students)
{:toc}

## Principal Investigator

### Tom Verguts

<img src="/images/profile_pic_tom.jpg" alt="Tom Verguts" width="50%" align="left" hspace="20" vspace="20">

__Personal statement__   
With some effort, most people can find their way in a new city. But how they do that, remains something of a mystery. Presumably, earlier knowledge (consulting maps, asking strangers, quickly storing a spatial path, etc) is recombined in novel ways to get to your destination. In this sense, we can call this a partially novel task. The ability to perform such tasks is called cognitive control. 

My main interest is understanding the mechanisms of cognitive control, using behavioral, computational, and neural methods.

__More information:__  
* GitHub: [@tomverguts](https://github.com/tomverguts)
* Email: [Tom.Verguts@UGent.be](mailto:Tom.Verguts@UGent.be)

## Post-doctoral researchers

### Anna Marzecova

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

### Cristian Buc Calderon

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

### Elise Lesage

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

### Esther De Loof

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

### Jacki Janowich

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

### Kobe Desender

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

### Mehdi Senoussi

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

## PhD students

<img src="/images/profile_pic_kate.jpg" alt="Kate Ergo" width="50%" align="left" hspace="20" vspace="20">

### Kate Ergo

My research focuses on how reward and reward prediction errors (i.e., mismatches between reward outcome and reward expectation) influence declarative memory (e.g., learning a foreign language). Using a Dutch-Swahili word learning paradigm, we found that word pair recognition increases linearly with larger and more positive RPEs [(De Loof et al., 2018)](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0189212). We also found neural oscillatory signatures that confirm the experience of signed RPEs (SRPEs) boosting declarative memory [(Ergo et al., 2019)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1053811918320676). My goal is to further investigate the robustness and generality of these findings. To study how RPEs influence declarative memory, I use both behavioral and EEG studies. Recently, I also became interested in neurostimulation techniques, such as tACS. My PhD is funded by the Flanders Fund for Scientific Research (FWO).

Outside of the lab, I enjoy hanging out with my dog Fellow, playing the guitar, karaoke, gaming and travelling. 

__More information:__  
* GitHub: [@KateErgo](https://github.com/KateErgo)
* Personal website: [Personal website](https://kateergo.github.io)
* Twitter: [@KateErgo](https://twitter.com/KateErgo)
* Email: [Kate.Ergo@UGent.be](mailto:Kate.Ergo@UGent.be)

### Pieter Huycke

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

### Pieter Verbeke

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

## Visiting researchers

### Fabrice Luyckx

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

## Internship students

Currently, no internship students are active in our lab.

Commit message:

rm jypnb + update about Pieter H

about/index.md, after:


- [Principal investigator](#Principal-Investigator)
- [Post-doctoral researchers](#Post-doctoral-researchers)
  * [Anna Marzecova](#Anna-Marzecova)
  * [Cristian Buc Calderon](#Cristian-Buc-Calderon)
  * [Elise Lesage](#Elise-Lesage)
  * [Esther De Loof](#Esther-De-Loof)
  * [Jacki Janowich](#Jacki-Janowich)
  * [Kobe Desender](#Kobe-Desender)
  * [Mehdi Senoussi](#Mehdi-Senoussi)
- [PhD students](#PhD-students)
  * [Kate Ergo](#Kate-Ergo)
  * [Pieter Huycke](#Pieter-Huycke)
  * [Pieter Verbeke](#Pieter-Verbeke)
- [Visiting researchers](#Visiting-researchers)
  * [Fabrice Luyckx](#Fabrice-Luyckx)
- [Internship students](#Internship-students)
{:toc}

## Principal Investigator

### Tom Verguts

<img src="/images/profile_pic_tom.jpg" alt="Tom Verguts" width="50%" align="left" hspace="20" vspace="20">

__Personal statement__   
With some effort, most people can find their way in a new city. But how they do that, remains something of a mystery. Presumably, earlier knowledge (consulting maps, asking strangers, quickly storing a spatial path, etc) is recombined in novel ways to get to your destination. In this sense, we can call this a partially novel task. The ability to perform such tasks is called cognitive control. 

My main interest is understanding the mechanisms of cognitive control, using behavioral, computational, and neural methods.

__More information:__  
* GitHub: [@tomverguts](https://github.com/tomverguts)
* Email: [Tom.Verguts@UGent.be](mailto:Tom.Verguts@UGent.be)

## Post-doctoral researchers

### Anna Marzecova

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

### Cristian Buc Calderon

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

### Elise Lesage

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

### Esther De Loof

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

### Jacki Janowich

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

### Kobe Desender

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

### Mehdi Senoussi

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

## PhD students

### Kate Ergo

<img src="/images/profile_pic_kate.jpg" alt="Kate Ergo" width="50%" align="left" hspace="20" vspace="20">

My research focuses on how reward and reward prediction errors (i.e., mismatches between reward outcome and reward expectation) influence declarative memory (e.g., learning a foreign language). Using a Dutch-Swahili word learning paradigm, we found that word pair recognition increases linearly with larger and more positive RPEs [(De Loof et al., 2018)](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0189212). We also found neural oscillatory signatures that confirm the experience of signed RPEs (SRPEs) boosting declarative memory [(Ergo et al., 2019)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1053811918320676). My goal is to further investigate the robustness and generality of these findings. To study how RPEs influence declarative memory, I use both behavioral and EEG studies. Recently, I also became interested in neurostimulation techniques, such as tACS. My PhD is funded by the Flanders Fund for Scientific Research (FWO).

Outside of the lab, I enjoy hanging out with my dog Fellow, playing the guitar, karaoke, gaming and travelling. 

__More information:__  
* GitHub: [@KateErgo](https://github.com/KateErgo)
* Personal website: [Personal website](https://kateergo.github.io)
* Twitter: [@KateErgo](https://twitter.com/KateErgo)
* Email: [Kate.Ergo@UGent.be](mailto:Kate.Ergo@UGent.be)

### Pieter Huycke

<img src="/images/profile_pic_pieter_h.jpg" alt="Pieter Huycke" width="50%" align="left" hspace="20" vspace="20">

In my Ph.D. project, we aim to take a fresh perspective that emphasizes the study of memory, in its natural dynamic setting, as a journey in the making. The two key characters in this journey are learning and consolidation: both processes are known to interact but have hitherto been studied in isolation. The perspective of this project enables them to be understood, for the first time, under the influence of their inherent interactions, and in the context of brain maturation and aging. The project aims to provide new insight into how much our ability to learn is dictated by the makeup of our neuronal circuitries, how memories are initially formed and later stored for the long haul, how this is made possible by the rewiring of our neuronal circuitries, and how our memory processes and capacities vary as our brain evolves through its lifespan. 

For this project I use mainly EEG and computational modeling. I like to perform my EEG analyses using Python's [mne software](https://martinos.org/mne/stable/index.html). Computational modeling is something I try to achieve using Python 3. 

Outside my work I find joy in programming, mainly to solve mathematical riddles. Also, I like to learn more about the Python programming language in general. Code for my first and second passion can both be found on my personal GitHub.

__More information:__  
* GitHub: [@phuycke](https://github.com/phuycke)
* Email: [Pieter.Huycke@UGent.be](mailto:Pieter.Huycke@UGent.be)


### Pieter Verbeke

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

## Visiting researchers

### Fabrice Luyckx

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Fusce id velit ut tortor pretium viverra. Neque volutpat ac tincidunt vitae semper. Urna duis convallis convallis tellus. Mi proin sed libero enim. Pharetra diam sit amet nisl. Diam in arcu cursus euismod quis viverra. Nisl tincidunt eget nullam non nisi est sit. Lacus viverra vitae congue eu consequat. Feugiat in ante metus dictum at tempor commodo ullamcorper. Mi in nulla posuere sollicitudin. Condimentum id venenatis a condimentum vitae sapien pellentesque habitant. Amet facilisis magna etiam tempor orci. Amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis urna id. Dui accumsan sit amet nulla facilisi morbi tempus iaculis.

## Internship students

Currently, no internship students are active in our lab.
