---
title: "Date Center Design"

categories:
  - Tech_News
tags:
  - [Date Center]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2022-12-24
last_modified_at: 2022-12-24
---

{% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/3-ways-data-center-design-will-change-in-the-future>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div>

## [3 ways data center design will change in the future](https://thenextweb.com/news/3-ways-data-center-design-will-change-in-the-future)

### The evolution of Data center

> - The COVID pandemic forced the world to shift to digital world, so the data is getting more important.
> - The demand to manage, store, and process that data has also increased exponentially.
> - How can we deal with data and cybersecurity without any challenges?

<br>

### Sustainability must be at the forefront of design

> With climate change being society’s biggest and most dire global challenge, the intensive energy needs of data centers has come into question bringing with it emerging regulations, but also new innovation.

- Gaining approval for building plans
  - A lengthy assessment and sustainability features
  - Take up less space and have a green facade
- Sustainability design for buildings
  - IONOS:
    - Green roofs for the ancillary buildings, substation, and bicycle shelter
    - Environmental protection areas for wildlife and nature to continue flourishing in the area
- Carbon neutral
  - Climate Neutral Data Centre Pact:
    - Go beyond sustainability targets and make their facilities carbon neutral by 2030
    - Replacing legacy carbon-intensive building materials

<br>

### The optimum location and process maximizes efficiency

> As the world is getting ever more crowded and space availability is shrinking, deciding where to locate a data center will become even more challenging.

- What to consider to decide the location of data center
  - Where your customers are located
  - Access to fiber and power
  - Natural factors such as weather conditions and topography

<br>

### Heightened security and monitoring is key

> Other than a need for increased efficiency, security concerns continue to put pressure on data centers globally.

- IONOS:
  - CCTV cameras and motion detectors
  - An intruder alarm system and fire and smoke detection
- Step up digital security measures
  - Remote access and virtualization
  - Risk of monitoring the data center remotely: If you get hacked, anybody could control a data center infrastructure remotely.

<br>

### What to expect in the future

- Vendors of data center infrastructure equipment to come with built-in AI capabilities that monitor and analyze health status
  - Improve the accuracy of real-time monitoring
  - Allow operators to have a constant overview of the site
- The demand for data centers will be increasing
- Data centers require less space and energy in the future
- Digital security measures develop: Virtualization and Transitions to the cloud 🆙

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
