---
title: "[C#] C# Control Structure"

categories:
  - CS
tags:
  - [C#, Control Structure]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-01-30
last_modified_at: 2023-01-30
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the c# tutorials!

- Reference tutorials link: <https://www.w3schools.com/cs/index.php>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Programming 1 - COMP 100-002"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

## What is a Program?

A program will be the statements that you write in Visual Studio.

These statement might include the following:

Comments:

- Notes that the developer would make for anyone reading the code.
- Should have your name and the date and purpose of your code.
- Must include the problem specification as well.

Statements:

- Using statement.
- Declaration statement.
- Expression statements.
- Other kinds of statements e.g. if, switch do-while, ...

<br>

## How are statements processed?

1. For most modern languages, executions (processing) starts in a special spot often referred to as the entry point. In C# it is the main method.

2. The first statement in the main method is processed, and then the next, and then the next until the last one and then the program ends.

3. This order of processing is natural and logical.

4. It is natural because this is how everything in the world works.

5. Logical because all the statement are guaranteed to be processed.
   - You are able to predict the output of a block of code.
   - This allows you to read code.

<br>

## How can we change the order of processing?

1. If the order of processing is the same everything the code in executed, then the program will only be capable of doing a single task.

   - If it is calculating volume, it will only calculation volume even if you execute is one million time.

2. If we require a program to be able to do more than one task, then the order of processing MUST be different i.e. there should be skips, jumps and repeats.

3. To formalize this non-sequential processing the concept of Control Structure was introduced by language designers.

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
