---
title: "[Data Type and Sequence] IPO Charts"

categories:
  - CS
tags:
  - [Data, IPO Charts]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-01-12
last_modified_at: 2023-01-12
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Math175-002 Functions & Number Systems"
{: .notice--danger}

> ## Objectives
>
> 1. Learn about programming
> 2. Learn about algorithms
> 3. Identify the output, input, and processing items from a problem specification
> 4. Explore programming concepts

<br>

## Definition of Computer Programming

### What is Computer Programming?

Computer programming is not only about **language syntax or using an IDE**, it is more about **solving problems**.

### Problem Solving Process

**Step 1. Analyze the problem**

> **Problem**
>
> Justin Trudeau has been working with Quality Cleaners for six years. Last year, he received a promotion with an increase of 3.5%, which brought his current weekly pay to $300. Justin is scheduled to receive another increase of 3% next week. He wants you to write a program that will display the amount of his new weekly pay.

1. Start to analyze by using IPO(Input Processing Output) Chart
   - Input: What is given
   - Processing: Stores intermediate values
   - Output: What is required
2. IPO Chart of the problem above
   | Input | Processing | Output |
   | :---: | :----: | :---: |
   | Current weekly pay | Processing items: | New weekly pay |
   | Raise rate | Algorithm: | |

> **Ignore the information that is not important in this problem**
>
> ~~Justin Trudeau has been working with Quality Cleaners for six years. Last year, he received a promotion with an increase of 3.5%, which brought~~ his current weekly pay to $300. Justin is scheduled to receive another increase of 3% next week. He wants you to write a program that will display the amount of his new weekly pay.

**Another examples of problem**

> **Example 1 of Problem**
>
> Doug Ford also works at Quality Cleaners, he earns $14 per hour. Last week, Doug worked 35 hours. He wants you to write a program that will display the amount of his net weekly pay.
> <br> &rarr; This problem specification does not contain enough information to be solved

> **Example 2 of Problem**
>
> Andrea Horwath, who works at Quality Cleaners, needs a program that will display the cost of painting a room.
> <br> &rarr; The input in this problem specification is not explicitly stated

**Step 2. Planning the Algorithm**

**Step 3. Desk-checking the Algorithm**

**Step 4. Code the Algorithm in a Program**

**Step 5. Desk-checking Program**

**Step 6. Evaluate and Modify**

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
