---
title: "[C#] C# Debugging"

categories:
  - CS
tags:
  - [Debugging]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-03-05
last_modified_at: 2023-03-05
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the c# tutorials!

- Reference link: Taken from “Introducing Visual Studio 2010” pg. 61
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Programming 1 - COMP 100-002"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

## Objectives

1. What are bugs and how do you get them?
2. Why do you need to debug?
3. Types of errors
   : - Syntax
   : - Semantic
   : - Runtime &rarr; Reproducible & Non-reproducible
   : - Implementation
4. Third party debuggers
5. Test Driven Development
6. Profilers
7. Summary

<br>

## 1. What are bugs and how do you get them?

- Anything that prevents the system from functioning as it should.
  : - Code that does not conform to the language rules will not compile.
  : - Incorrectly implemented code will do the task correctly.
- These may occur anything in the software development life cycle.
  : - During coding (easiest to find and fix)
  : - At compilation (fairly easy to find and fix)
  : - During execution (most difficult to find and fix)
- The IDE goes a long way in making the coding experience a better one.
- The runtime can identify suspected statement during execution.

<br>

## 2. Why do you have to debug?

- No one is perfect, you will make mistakes.
- It is probably impossible to have a reasonable complex program completely free of bugs.
- We want to reduce undesirable artifacts during the executable of the program.
- In some non-critical systems, some amount of deviations may be tolerated.
  : - Games, direction findings in the malls, and so on.
- In high-risk systems, even the tiniest error can have dire outcomes.
  : - Radiation therapy, autonomous vehicles, air traffic control.
- Neither high-risk or non-critical.
  : - Threat detection, inventory system, flight reservation.

### <u>Preventing bugs</u>

- Write clean code
  : - Go for a simple style rather than a complicated or smart style.
  : - Choose meaningful identifiers.
  : - Use camel-casing for variable (and pascal-casing for method).
  : - Use named constants instead of magic number.
  : - One statement per line. &rarr; It is ok to declare (and initialize) multiple variables of the same type in one line.
- The design of a language also helps to decrease the chance of writing buggy code.
  : - Dynamically typed scripting language are more prone to bugs.
  : - Statically typed compiled languages generally have less bugs.
- Adding documentation
  : - Although C# is a relatively descriptive language, you should include an appropriate amount of documentation in your code.

### <u>What is debugging?</u>

- Is figuring out what is wrong with your code.
  : - Implies that you are crystal clear about the problem being solved.
  : - You must be able to predict the state of your system at any point in execution.
- What could be wrong about your code?
  : - It does not compile (very easy to fix)
  : - It does not produce the intending results &rarr; Consistently OR Intermittently (extremely difficult to fix)
- Sometimes it can as simply as running your code and examine the result.
  : - Your if statement is giving the reverse of the intended logic.
  : - You are not capturing the boundary condition of your loop.

<br>

## 3. Types of errors

### <u>Syntax Errors</u>

- These are grammatical errors that occurs while coding.
- They manifest as typos and are the easiest to find and fix (you have been doing this since week 1).
- The IDE flags these as red squiggly lines. Yellow squiggles are warning and green squiggles are for information.
- If you hover the mouse over the squiggles, the IDE will tell you what is wrong and even suggest corrections (which are mostly correct).
- These are the earliest errors you will encounter and the often the simplest to correct. Common errors are:
  : - Unbalanced brackets, missing or miss-placed semi-colons, using the assignment operator for comparison, forgetting to delimit string literals by double quotes.
- Subtly errors like the use of unassigned variable are only slightly more difficult to resolved.

### <u>Semantic Errors</u>

- These are mostly logic errors, some of which can be caught be the compiler.
- The compiler will give you the line and column number of the suspected error.
- When you run the program, you don’t get the output that you expect.
  : - Expecting a double in integer division.
- Sometimes the error can be fixed by just examining the output.
  : - E.g. one off errors in looping.
  : - You can also put print statement to check the value of suspect variable.
- If you are not able to find the error with the above techniques.
- You will be to execute your code in single-step mode.

### <u>Runtime time Errors</u>

- These are the most difficulty to track down and fix.
- These are mainly logic errors.
- If it is easily reproducible, then it is possible to be located and possibly fixed.
- If it is not reproducible, or intermittent, then it is very hard to locate and fix.
- A common technique is use print statement to try to zoom in on the error source. You might have to modify your code to print finer level of details.
- If this does not work, then setting a breakpoint before the suspect code statement and running the code in single step execution mode.

### <u>Implementation Errors</u>

- When a feature or functionality is not implement correctly.
- The only fix is a new release of the software.
- Relying of a service or API that has changed or is no longer available.
  : - Payment service
  : - Database
- This are relatively easy to detect. Fixing might or might not be difficult.

<br>

## 4. Third party debuggers

- [Debugging with third party tools](https://os.mbed.com/docs/mbed-os/v6.15/debug-test/third-party-tools.html)
- [Not Just My Code: How to debug third party libraries without decompiling them](https://jackspektor.medium.com/not-just-my-code-how-to-debug-third-party-libraries-without-decompiling-them-8e47e706dbe7)
- [Debugging Third-Party Code in Visual Studio](https://blog.yaakov.online/debugging-third-party-code-in-visual-studio/)

<br>

## Single-step execution mode

- This allows you to process a line at a time.
- You may add a breakpoint (or a number of points). The program will run until it reaches a breakpoint and then it will enter single-step mode.
- You may inspect the value of a variable simply by hovering the mouse over the variable.
- You may also set up a set of variables (a watch list), that you may follow while the code in executing.
- You also have the option of stepping over a block of code or entering the block.
- If you are in a code block you may also step out of the block.
- Looping errors are very likely to be detected using this technique.

<br>

## Tasks

- Set a break point -> Right click the line and select Insert Breakpoint
- Run the program in Debug-mode -> F5
- This will bring up the Debug Toolbar (you can also use the following keyboard shortcuts)
- Stop Debugging -> Shift+F5
- Restart -> Ctrl+Shift+F5
- Show Next Statement -> Alt + Num \*
- Step Into -> F11
- Step Over -> F10
- Step Out -> Shift+F11
- Step Forward -> Alt + \]
- Step Backward -> Alt + \[

<br>

## 5. Test Driven Development

- TDD is an attractive paradigm that is used in modern software development.
- Essentially to write a test case for each feature of your software.
- Then you write code to remove all the errors one at a time.
- When all the errors are remove, your software is ready to be shipped.
- This topic will be further explored in Programming 2 and in other courses in later semester.

<br>

## 6. Profilers

- A profiler is a tool that monitors the execution of another application.
- The foremost objective is the measurement of speed, it can be used to gather information about the following:
  : - Loading and unloading of assemblies, modules, classes, or methods.
  : - Thread creation and destruction.
  : - Transitions between unmanaged and managed code.
  : - Jit compilation.
  : - Memory heap and garbage collection.
- It can be done in sampling and non-sampling mode.
- Although, your IDE comes with a profiler, at this stage of your learning, we will not focus on speed or efficiency of your code, but on clarity and robustness.

<br>

## 7. Summary

- Debugging is a very important part of the production of a software system.
- A developer’s philosophy should be to write simple and clean code.
- This will mitigate bugs later
- You are likely go through the process three times:
- Before compilation
  : - Generally easy to fix.
- During compilation
  : - Reasonable difficult to fix.
- After compilation
  : - Very difficult to fix.

<br>

## Error to Fixed

### <u>Logic error</u>

```
//following code has a logic error

for(int c = 0; c <= 100; c++)
{
  Console.WriteLine($"{c,5:F} {9 / 5 * c + 32,6:F}");
}
---------------------------------------------------------------

//code is fixed

for(int c = 0; c <= 100; c++)
{
  Console.WriteLine($"{c,5:F} {9.0 / 5 * c + 32,6:F}");
}
```

### <u>Decomposing a complex math operation</u>

```
//following code has a logic error. (trying to print y = x^2 – x - 6) cols: | x | x^2 | –x | -6 | y |

for (double x= 0; x < 1; x += 0.1)
{
  Console.WriteLine($"{x,4:F1} {x*x,6:F1} {-x,6:F1} {-6,6:F1} {x*x + x - 6,6:F1}");
}
---------------------------------------------------------------

//code is fixed

for (double x= 0; x < 1; x += 0.1)
{
  double first = x * x; //this can be verified in the debugger
  double second = -x; //this can be verified in the debugger
  double y = first + second - 6; //this can be verified in the debugger

  Console.WriteLine($"{x,4:F1} {first,6:F1} {second,6:F1} {-6,6:F1} {y,6:F1}");
}
```

### <u>Un-initialize variable</u>

```
// Let assume that there are only two type of student: International and Domestic

double fee;

if (studentType == "domestic")
{
  fee = 349.99;
}
if (studentType == "international")
{
  fee = 1395.99;
}

Console.WriteLine($"For {studentType} students the fee is {fee:C}!");
---------------------------------------------------------------

// Now fee will always have a value

// alternately you may initialize fee to a sensible value
// Let assume that there are only two type of student: International and Domestic

double fee;

if (studentType == "domestic")
{
  fee = 349.99;
}
else
{
  fee = 1395.99;
}

Console.WriteLine($"For {studentType} students the fee is {fee:C}!");
```

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
