---
title: "[Exercise] IPO Charts - 2"

categories:
  - CS
tags:
  - [IPO Charts]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-01-12
last_modified_at: 2023-01-12
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Math175-002 Functions & Number Systems"
{: .notice--danger}

# Instructions

For each of the problems below, identify the output(s), identify the inputs and decide if the problem is solvable. If it can be solved, generate an algorithm and create a three-column IPO chart with the required algorithm. The column will contain the Input Processing and Output information respectively.

<br>

## Problem 1

Create a program that calculates and displays the average of three numbers. The user will enter the three numbers.

## Answer 1

<br>

## Problem 2

Builders’s Inc. needs a program that allows its salesclerks to enter the diameter of a circle and the prices of railing material per foot. The program should display the circumference of the circle and total cost of the railing material. (Use 3.14 as the value of pi). [You should use double instead of int32 for the number]

## Answer 2

<br>

## Problem 3

Willow Pools wants a program that allows its salespeople to enter the dimensions of a rectangular pool in meters. The program should display the volume of the rectangular pool.

## Answer 3

<br>

## Problem 4

Perry Brown needs a program that allows him to enter the length of four sides of a polygon. The program should display the perimeter of the polygon.

## Answer 4

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
