---
title: "[C#] C# Named Constants"

categories:
  - CS
tags:
  - [C#, Named Constants]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-02-02
last_modified_at: 2023-02-02
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the c# tutorials!

- Reference tutorials link: <https://www.w3schools.com/cs/index.php>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Programming 1 - COMP 100-002"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

## What are Named Constants?

- Are immutable.
  : Values that would not change in the life of the program.

- Must be known at compile time (must be set at declaration).
  : Has to be a literal or a constant expression.

- Only C# built-in types may be declared constant (except objects).

<br>

## Usage

- Value is set at declaration.

- In your code, it is used like a normal variable.

- It can not appear on the left side of an expression after declaration.
  : &rarr; You may not assign a new value to it.

Example:

```
const string COMPANY_NAME = "Centennial College";
const char SPACE = ' ';
const double TAX_RATE = 0.13;
const int LEGAL_AGE = 18;
const int MONTHS = 12, DAYS = 365;
const double DAYS_PER_MONTH = DAYS / (double)MONTHS;

cost = price * (1 + TAX_RATE);
```

<br>

## Why Use Named Constants?

- Improves readability of your code.
  : You see words not values.

- Code maintenance.
  : Easier to edit code.
  : If you have the same literal value for two items and you want to change one of them, it is almost impossible to make a certain change.

- Security.
  : Value may not change during execution of program.

<br>

## "ToUpper" and "ToLower" Methods

- These string methods returns a string that is all uppercased or all lowercased.
- They only work with strings (Does not work with char).
- It is convenient when doing string comparisons.
- If a user is asked to the two letter province code.
- For this province the user response might be any of the following:
  : &rarr; ON, On, on, oN
- To simplify processing the response, you can decide to compare either the uppercased or the lowercased version the response.

Example:

```
Console.Write("What shape would you like to work with? ");

string shape = Console.ReadLine();

switch(shape.ToLower())
{
  case "square":
    Console.WriteLine($"The area of a {shape} is length x width");
    break;
  case "triangle":
    Console.WriteLine($"The area of a {shape} is base x height / 2");
    break;
}

Console.WriteLine($"{shape} -> {shape.ToUpper()}"); // shape does not change
```

{% capture notice-2 %}

- Named constants is having a name for a value that may not change.
- You have the confidence that it will not change in the execution of the application.
- Your code is more readable.
  - You see a descriptive name instead of a literal value.
- Code maintenance is simpler.
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--info">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div>

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
