---
layout: post
title: "My Setup"
description: "My Setup Interview"
category: articles
tags: [sample post, images, test]
---
I am doing The Setup interview for myself. It is basically based on these four questions:

- Who are you and what do you do?
- What hardware do you use?
- And what software?
- What would be your dream setup?

So here it goes:

### Who are you and what do you do?

Hey, I am Vinit and I am a Node.js/JavaScript developer at this awesome dutch startup,[Changer](http://changer.nl).I spend most of my time writing and reading code and programming books and listening to music.

### What hardware do you use?

I use a Macbook Pro, Mid 2009, with 8 GB Ram and 256 GB SSD. I also use a apple wired keyboard, BenQ Monitors at work. I use Logitech GT400 mouse at work and home. 
I also have an old Dell Inspiron Laptop which has Linux and Windows 7.
My phone is HTC Desire X with runs Android ICS.
I use Logitech Headphones/HTC earphone when i need to listen to music while working.

### And What Software?

I do all my development on OS X Mountain Lion now, earlier did all my development on Ubuntu 12.04. 

Well here is the list of Software i use:

- OS: OS X, Android, Windows, Linux
- Browsers: Chrome(mostly), Firefox
- TextEditor: SublimeText2, Vim, TextMate.
- Music and Video : VLC, iTunes, QuickTime.
- Terminal: Iterm2(on mac), KDE terminal on Linux.
- Backup: Google Drive, Dropbox.

I use all the stack required to do the Nodejs/JS development.
For productivity i am a big fan of Omnifocus app and use notes applications quite often.

On Android, i use Runkeeper, Aldiko, Google Keep, Maps, Instagram, Twitter, Dropbox mostly.

### What would be your dream setup?

My dream setup would be couple of Big 30-inch monitors and a better flat keyboard, also a really good pair of Noise canceling headphones.
I mostly like minimalistic setup so i guess that would do.



