---
title: Samu Rise

layout: single
classes:
  - landing
  - dark-theme

excerpt: "High speed sword swingin' Samurai combat"

header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/banner-samurise.jpg
  caption: "Samu Rise"
  overlay_filter: 0.2
  cta_label: "Download free"
  cta_url: "https://unsplash.com"
---

<h1>Wanted: Worthy Foes</h1>
<p>Samu Rise is a high speed arcade slash 'em up, with a focus on smooth flowing combat, rewarding skillful play, and enabling the player to pull off incredible chains of moves.</p>
<p>The game follows a lone Samurai, seeking a worthy challenge. They place a bounty on their own head, in order to attract mercenaries to fight. Money earned in battle is immediately reinvested into more numerous and dangerous enemies to fight.</p>

<h1>Key Features</h1>

---
feature_row:
  - image_path: /assets/images/samu-rise/storyline-0.png
    alt: "Screenshot 1"
    title: "Fast paced swordplay"
    excerpt: "Mastering Samu Rise requires quick thinking, immaculate timing, and a love of looking amazing while you style out on your opponents. Successful attacks can be strung together almost immediately, and endlessly. But miss once, and you leave your enemy with an opening, and yourself with no defences."
  - image_path: /assets/images/samu-rise/storyline-1.png
    alt: "Screenshot 2"
    title: "A casual game for hardcore players"
    excerpt: "Samu Rise is a game with a simple core, which you can pick up quickly, and master over time. At its heart, the game is designed to be picked up for quick play sessions. You can start, slaughter unworthy foes, and leave with a pumping heart in the time it takes for your tea to boil."
  - image_path: /assets/images/samu-rise/storyline-2.png
    alt: "Screenshot 3"
    title: "Level up your skill, not your abilities"
    excerpt: "Why buy upgrades, when you're already amazing? There's only one way to level up in Samu Rise, and that's to get better at it. Money earned lets you upgrade your enemies, so you can let the difficulty keep up with your own self improvement. Pirates? Knights? Or just more things to kill? Your choice!"
---