---
layout: post
title: "simquadrat - part 1"
date: 2016-08-20
excerpt: "Why I choose to become a customer of a MVNE"
tags: [mvne, sipgate, simquadrat, api]
project: true
comments: true
categories:
- project
---

I was frustrated with my previous mobile carrier who did nothing to convince existings customers to stay with them I got a simcard from a relatively unkown company called "simquadrat". 
After my contract with o2 expired I ported my number to [simquadrat](http://smqdr.at/hVTNugrW) and gave it a try.
Many users complained about the bad coverage but I have never had any problems. Those affected of bad coverage might experienced some improvements when o2 bought Eplus.
Anyway: I am using simquadrat and I am very excited about it.

The reason is not the coverage or their available packages. Its a feature that requires some tinkering: sipgate.io

[sipgate.io](https://www.sipgate.io/de) is a Push-API that sends information to a webserver every time you receive or make a call.
Does not sound very useful, eh?

I thought the same until I gave it some thought. I never liked carrying two cellphones (private and offical one) just to make or receive calls.
But I also was not willing to provide my private number to get rid of the official cellphone.
sipgate.io allowed me to leave my employers mobile at home and still be able to make work related calls from my iPhone without revealing my private number.

All I needed to do was to book the feature @ simquadrat, install ngrok and write a small python program based on the [examples](https://github.com/sipgate/sipgate.io/tree/master/examples) that are already provided by sipgate.
