---
category: general
disqus_id: 20160701
excerpt: >
  A discussion about job titles in tech and why no one likes them
header:
  teaser: monitorama-2016.jpg
gallery:
  - image_path: monitorama-2016.jpg
    alt: Pips and Bounce after-party at Monitorama 2016 
title: I'm in ops
---
I just got back from [Monitorama](http://www.monitorama.com) and was once again
reminded how terrible job titles are in the tech field.  At each of the social
gatherings I would set off to meet new people, and by far the most common
introduction was "Hello my name is ..., and I'm in ops".  I did meet several Site
Reliability Engineers, a few Developers, and a few others, but the vast majority
were "in ops".

{% include gallery caption="Pips and Bounce after-party at Monitorama 2016" %}

As it happens, I too am "in ops". I choose to introduce myself that way, likely
for the same reason as everyone else; because my real job title doesn't come close
to describing what I do, and all the alternatives either don't apply or don't
make grammatical sense.

Officially my job title is Senior Linux Administrator, but for me that brings to mind a
bunch of scruffy neckbeards artisanally hand-crafting config files and shunning daylight.
Instead, I spend most of my days automating installs and config changes with [Chef](http://chef.io)
and [Etch](http://github.com/etch/etch). I am also singularly responsible for our
network infrastructure and firewalls (Network Engineer/Administrator).  I often
need to write software to help test and troubleshoot the systems I'm building, and
occasionally even write the software the finished systems will run (Software Developer).
I spend a sizable amount of my time setting up, optimizing, and reacting to alerts
in our various monitoring systems (Site Reliability Engineer).  And when I'm not
doing any of those things I'm learning new programming/markup/query languages trying
to find the slow spots in our infrastructure so we can save a few milliseconds on
each web request (Data Scientist).

A few years ago the term [DevOps](https://theagileadmin.com/what-is-devops/)
started getting popular as a way to describe how Developers and Operations can
work together using the same tools to be more efficient and build better products.
Some people have tried to use it as a job title such as DevOps Engineer, or DevOps
Administrator.  The problem with these sorts of titles is they just don't make sense,
you might as well call yourself an Agile Engineer, or a Teamwork Administrator.

Operations Engineer isn't bad, but that's only one step away from "I'm in ops",
and anyone outside the tech field would likely think it has something to do with
trains.  I guess for now I'll just have to keep telling people "I'm in ops", at least
until I find a better title I can steal.
