---
title: "Using the Microsoft Dynamics CRM Web API in Python"
description: ""
category: [Microsoft Dynamics CRM]
tags: Python, [Microsoft Dynamics CRM], OData
---


We want to query and call Web API actions on the [Microsoft Dynamics CRM 2016 Odata endpoint](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/mt593051.aspx) in Python. We want to do it because we can.
Also, Python has a rich set of modules for all sorts from machine learning to forecasting- We want to apply this to CRM data. 

The options for integration include using an odata library like [ODatapy-Client](https://github.com/OData/odatapy-client) which generates proxy code or static types from the Web API metadata. 
Using ODatapy-Client takes a fair amount of work considering that the metadata generated by the CRM web api is a lot and complex. 

Given however that all we're doing is issuing http requests you could use something as simple as cURL. Using PowerShell on an on-premise deployment this would look like this:
 `curl [Organization URI]/api/data/v8.1/accounts?$select=accountnumber,name -Credential domain\username` to get the account number and name for all accounts in CRM. Try that to get a feel of the data. 

In Python we used the [requests](http://docs.python-requests.org/en/master/) and [pycurl](http://pycurl.io/docs/latest/index.html) modules. For the `requests` module we also brought in the `requests_ntlm` module to provide NTLM authentication.
Using `pycurl` our code would look like this:

{% highlight Python %}
from io import BytesIO
import json,pycurl

url='[Organization URI]/api/data/v8.1/accounts?$select=accountnumber,name'

request = pycurl.Curl()
response = BytesIO()

# Setup http request
request.setopt(pycurl.URL, url)
request.setopt(pycurl.WRITEDATA, response)
request.setopt(pycurl.HTTPAUTH,cURL.HTTPAUTH_NTLM)
request.setopt(pycurl.USERPWD,"{}:{}".format(<username>,<password>))

request.perform()
request.close()

# Retrieve response string and encode using the json module
response.getvalue()
json.loads(response.getvalue)
{% endhighlight %}

`pycurl` allows us to set a number options using the `setopt` method which covers most complex http requests that we may have.
Using the `requests` module we have the following:

{% highlight Python %}
import json, requests
from requests_ntlm import HttpNtlmAuth

url='[Organization URI]/api/data/v8.1/accounts?$select=accountnumber,name'

# Issue http request
response = requests.get(url, auth=HttpNtlmAuth(<username>,<password>))

# Display response content in the console
response.content

# Use json module to encode the string content e.g. into a dictionary
accounts = json.loads(response.content)
{% endhighlight %}

We employ the `json` module to allow decoding and encoding of json strings returned from our http requests. The `requests` module allows you to call requests.json which can also encode the response output as json. `requests` also has a Session object which allows you to issue http request in the context of one session and leverage connection pooling. 

In order to create a record you can setup the `requests` object with the appropriate headers. So given you want to create an account you would do something like this:

{% highlight Python %}
# Account to be created
target = {"name": "Sample Account",
          "creditonhold": true,
          "address1_latitude": 47.639483,
          "description": "Account description here.",
          "revenue": 5000000,
          "accountcategorycode": 1
         }
url='[Organization URI]/api/data/v8.1/accounts'
headers = {'Content-Type':'application/json; charset=utf-8' ;'Accept':'application/json'}
response = requests.post(url, auth=HttpNtlmAuth(<username>,<password>), data=target, headers=headers)
{% endhighlight %}

In the above example we are issuing a POST request hence the call to `requests.post` instead of `get` as was done previously.It is also possible to call Web-Api functions. In the below example we call the simple WhoAmI function.

{% highlight Python %}
requests.get('[Organization URI]/api/data/v8.1/WhoAmI', auth=HttpNtlmAuth(username,pwd))
{% endhighlight %}

You can pretty much do everything that is supported using the Dynamics CRM 2016 Web API.
More on the CRM Web API is available on [MSDN](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/mt593051.aspx).
