---
title:  "AI for Agriculture"
date:   2018-06-05
categories:
  - posts
tags:
  - Artificial intelligence
  - Machine learning 
  - agriculture
header:
  teaser: "assets/images/gianluca-primon-168748-unsplash.jpg"
---


To understand the impact of Artificial intelligence on Agriculture it is
important to put it in the context of larger economic changes in agriculture.
Since 1948 US agricultural output has grown at 1.48% annually and total factor
productivity have risen by about 1.38% annually with minimal growth in farm
inputs (USDA ERS 2018).  While total farm input growth has remained flat, the
allocation of these inputs has shifted dramatically, with 4-fold declines in
labor inputs, modest declines in land input and increases in pesticide,
fertilizer and machinery use. This has taken place during a time of farm
consolidation that has led to fewer, better capitalized producers that are able
to invest in technological improvements.

Artificial intelligence is a field of computer science deals with creating
machines that can reason. Today the distinction is often made between broad AI
characteristic of human intelligence and narrow AI focused on one task like
labeling objects in pictures. Machine learning is a subset of AI that focuses on
having machines infer patterns from data that allow them to predict values or
classes. This area has seen incredible growth because in areas like computer
vision, machines have approached human performance and in other areas like
pattern recognition with high dimensional data they have exceeded it. Future
areas of AI may focus on the next layer of cognitive complexity; inferring
causality and reasoning through counterfactual arguments to deduce new ideas.

Artificial intelligence will disrupt and improve agriculture in many ways, but
as with many systemic technologies like steam, electricity, and rail, auto and
container transportation systems, the disruption will likely come from
efficiency gains in a wide range of processes at all levels of agriculture
rather than one breakthrough technology. These systemic changes are likely to
accelerate declines in farm employment, while increasing total farm output and
efficiency.

Currently AI development in agriculture is focused in a few key areas.

*	Robotics, aided by advances in machine vision has allowed researchers to
create robots that can weed lettuce fields (Blue River Technologies) or pick
strawberries (CROO Robotics)—tasks that until recently could only be done by
humans.

*	Smart tractor technologies that guide a tractor and control the application
of seed and chemicals and measure yields at specific points in the field are
collecting valuable data that will enable the holders of that data to create
tremendous value by developing predictive models for how inputs should be used.
Currently that data is in private hands but is being aggregated by farm
equipment companies. By developing free, useful software tools for the farmer,
ARS could collect enough of that data to publicly advance the field and spur
grater innovation and insight from drone and satellite data.

*	A lot of work is being done developing models to take image data from
drones and turn it into recommendations of where to spray, fertilize or plant.

*	Soil and plant diagnostics. Work is being done to diagnose plant disease by
images and correlate soil chemistry and microbial contents with disease. Some of
this work involves AI.

*	Economic models can be enhanced to predict the effects of demand, planting
choices and weather to help farmers make decisions about what to plant and
planting/harvest timing
https://news.microsoft.com/en-in/features/ai-agriculture-icrisat-upl-india/.

*	IoT – What discussion of AI would be complete without its buzzword cousin
the internet of things? Environmental sensors deployed in fields will likely
yield insights that can increase productivity and decrease input use once
large-scale platforms to integrate and assimilate the data are in place and
enough data has been gathered to train models that create valuable predictions
from that data. Productivity will also be gained from simple IoT applications
like text alerts that an irrigation pump has failed or a gate that can be
remotely operated.

*	Crop improvement, AI is beginning to be applied to crop improvement in
several ways. Image recognition is improving phenomics, and allowing breeders to
scale up screens. The selection of genomic intervals for breeding or insertion
by CRISPR/CAS9 will speed up improvement. ML may be applied to complex
prediction problems like multi-trait selection.

*	Animal health – The behavior of animals (feeding, watering and movement)
from RFID chips) can be used to identify sick animals, like fitbits for pigs.

In the Future AI may be focused on new areas including

*	Selecting genomic regions for breeding to increase genetic diversity but
retain desirable traits in low diversity crops like citrus or grapes that are
susceptible to disease outbreaks.

*	Engineering microbial consortia to achieve specific outcomes like disease
suppression, drought tolerance or yield improvement.

*	Post-harvest processing improvements like FTIR spectroscopy and analysis of
grain to divert aflatoxin contaminated grain before it is mixed with other grain
or better supply chain control to reduce spoilage. I know Driscoll’s is using
machine vision to avoid backing bad berries.

*	The control of non-point source pollution.  IoT sensors and valves can be
used to control runoff from tile drains and releases from waste lagoons on
concentrated animal feeding operations. This is particularly important for water
bodies like Lake Erie and the Gulf of Mexico.  Investment in these technologies
will not likely proceed until regulations create market demand for non-point
source pollution control technologies.
