---
title: "My heart"
author: "Abdul"
layout: posts
categories: free_writing
---

To my beloved.
I wish you a happy birthday, and selfishly, I hope to be there for all of them.

# My Love

No love like mine, another lifetime we use couldn't be separated.

My heart was held together by the feelings that you gave me.

I was undeserving, your true love was taken for was taken for granted.

I needed to mature, become the man that you deserved.

I worked, I struggled, became a version of myself that you was worthy of your love.

You stayed strong and always true to your nature.

I worked on myself, needing to find who I once was.

You made sure to guide me, which made me infatuated by who you were.



We played cat and mouse, always switching roles.

Our heart blinded by our honor

Our true nature which was so immature.

We tried our hardest to stay away

But Allah was rained storms of our truth which we could not astray.

We found ourselves together, broken and in pain

The only truth was to heal was to be whole once again.

We broke down, told our peace, and begged only for acceptance.

Our road was so long, and due to me full of deception.

I broke down, prayed to Allah, no other way for redemption.

He told me I needed to grow, to be worthy of your love.


I spent day after day, becoming the man I should be.

My Dad and more importantly my Granddad looking down on me

Telling me Son, don't you worry the road is broken, and meant to be mended.

True men can only be themselves, and never be perfected.

But being worthy of her love is something you can't take for granted.

If you aren't willing to fail, you can never be respected.


My life is my bond and I live by my word.

Our journey is one which can never be unheard,

it's a tale of true, more importantly energy which is reciprocated.

In dark times, it is something which will always make me feel educated.

I was thought by the true love that you presented.

So true and pure it could never be pretended.


You gave me you and I did my best to be who I should.

A man who will do all he could to be deserving of your love.

And although that love is to be tested.

My love for you will never be neglected.


You have shown me who I once was

I look at you and see the love that my father possessed.

If it wasn't for you that history would be neglected.

Your love has educated me, for the bond that I possess.

I am grateful for without you I would stay as I once was.

You gave me love which makes me feel like i'm in on drugs.


I must thank you for this education.

Our kids will be encapsulated by who you made us.

You made us strong, true, and deserving.

You are my nature, my hand, my truest self.

I hope that I live to be the man you will love.

No test that life throws will keep you away from me.

I rather die than to try to be, what I should be.

So please, I beg you, take my word to be true.

The angel gave me heaven, because they gave me you.
