---
layout: single
title: "ErgoDash Custom Mechanical Keyboard"
tags:
  - Mechanical Keyboard
  - DIY
  - Ergonomy
  - Productivity
  - Keeb
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
author_profile: true
classes: wide
---

# But ... why
After serendipitous stumbling upon the [Typeracer](https://play.typeracer.com/) typing competition website, then on the [Keybr](www.keybr.com) touch typing tutoring website, it turned out that I was using my keyboard wrong all along.
No wonder, since my typing skills were mostly improvised on the go, and deeply influenced by gamings habits (WASD looking at you ...).
Embarkinga new journey to improve my typing by exercising on [Keybr](www.keybr.com), it downed on me that the typing experience could be drastically improved by switching to a more tailored keyboards.

First, the slight shift to the right of the keyboard keys, which seems to have been inherited from physical constraints that occurred during the design of typewriters appeared to be not necessary, and even conterproductive at times.
Furthermore, the under-exploitation of the thumbs, at least on the Realforce keyboard that is my daily driver so far could be vastly improved upon with thumb cluster keys.
Especially when using the i3 Window Tiling Manager, it is quite cumbersome to, say, switch between workspaces, windows, or switching input methods on the IME, because it requires the use of the Meta key to do so.
In addition, learning about pronation occuring during prolonged uses, as well as the slightly hunched position I would have to sit due to the flatness and reduced width of my current keyboard finally motivated me to look deeeper into the matter of customized keyboards.

After immersing myself in the awesome community of [r/MechanicalKeyboards](https://www.reddit.com/r/MechanicalKeyboards/) and learning more mechanical keyboards from scratch, the image of the ideal (at that time) keyboard slowly started to form in my mind.
Namely, it had to be (1) a split keyboard, (2) with enough thumb cluster keys to map the Meta and Layer keys and (3) tilting and tenting support to reduce pronation and allow for a "straight back and wide shoulder" postion while typing.
Turns out that besides the potential benefits cited above, customized mechanical keyboards can also results in faster typing speed depending on the switches installed, and allows for an in-depth customization of the key layouts via firmware editing and flashing.

# Part List
- Maybe with different configurations, LED, no LED, underglow no underglow, hotswap

# Building order
- Step by step pics and noods

# Build nots
