---
title: My now page for March 2021
tags:
  - now
---

_Inspired by Derek Siver's suggestion on keeping a ["now page"](https://sive.rs/now) updated, I have decided I will do one a month. The now page will stay in the navigation above and will be transformed into a post once the month switches, leaving room for the next month's one.
This way it'll be useful to me to have a better idea of things I do and get interested in, and their progress; I'll try to be disciplined with this process. So here's what I've been up to in March 2021._

## Reading

I'm currently on a few things (as books):
* Radical Candor - this is about management (of people) and it is being extremely helpful in various ways;
* 15 million degrees - I found this randomly via Twitter and bought it; it had been a while that I read a good scipop book;
* Radical Focus (all about the radicality this month) - this is the book that shared the OKR business system to the world, it's pretty good if you've never heard of this system

## Headspace

Headspace is low. I am dealing with a few things that require thinking, so the bandwidth really is short.

## Writing

I am keeping up with my book about entering data science, but it's a bit stalled at the moment in terms of written content. This is due to a combination of the low headspace (as per above) and the fact that I am taking a step back and reflecting on what shape I want to give it. I'm also gathering info from people (I've launched a survey for this purpose and I am talking to a few friends), which is very useful. All in all, everyone I talk to tells me it's a great idea to write these ideas up.

## Sport

I resumed some running! I'm very proud - it was quite challenging given the fact that my cardio isn't at its best (I've been doing mostly strength/tone during this pandemic) but totally worth it.

## Drawing and vizzing

I've started a little project about vizzing the topic of "women in tech/science". The first viz, a simple one, has gone up.
