---
layout: single
classes: wide
title:  "More JS. reduce()/Spread syntax"
categories: JavaScript
tags: [30DaysOfJS, Array, reduce, Spread syntax, MoreJS]
sidebar:
    nav: docs
---


# Further Study: reduce() and spread syntax

> Solving some exercises, I found it hard to get the idea of using `reduce()`. Either the explanation in 30DaysOfJs or the MDN Document didn't help me, so I decided to study more about the method with some video tutorials.
<br>

## 1. Understanding the concept
+ ["JavaScript Array Reduce"][1]

`reduce()` takes two arguments: <br>

1) a callback function with two parameters: accumulator and current value<br>

2) the initial value for the accumulator(optional but recommended - the default value is set to the value of first index).<br>

The callback function is executed multiple times, and each time the current value will be set to one element in the array, moving forwards. So each call, I'll get the current value and execute the function. Internally, the reducer will get the result of the function and store it in the accumulator. Finally, it returns a single value, and I can store it in a variable.<br>

So to simply put, `reduce()` takes two parameters, executes a function on those parameters, and the result from the function becomes one of the parameters on the next round. The accumulator is continuously set to the value after the callback function is executed. The reducer starts with an accumulator, and looping through the array, converts all the elements into a single value.<br>


```js
//without initialization, adding all the elements of numbers array
const sum = numbers.reduce(
  (accumulator, currentValue) => accumulator + currentValue
);
```
<br>

## + Spread Syntax(...)

+ [MDN Document: Spread Syntax(`...`)][3]

Spread syntax "expands" an array into its elements. can be used when all elements from an object or array need to be included in a list of some kind. When I invoke a function, I can pass all the values in the array by using the spread syntax and the array name - `...array`<br>

It is commonly used when I want to add a new item to a local data store, or display all stored items plus a new addition.

```js
let numbers = [0, 1, 2];
let newNumber = 3;
numbers = [...numbers, newNumber];
console.log(numbers);  // (4) [0, 1, 2, 3]
```
<br>

Spread syntax could also be used to combine two arrays by inserting all elements from the array.

```js
let array = [0, 1, 2];
let newArray = [...array, 3, 4, 5];
console.log(array);  // (6) [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
```

<br>

## 2. How to use reduce() with examples
+ ["Reduce: 10 Different Examples. JavaScript Fundamentals."][2]

```js
const people = [
  { id: "1", name: "Leigh", age: 35 },
  { id: "2", name: "Jenny", age: 30 },
  { id: "3", name: "Heather", age: 28 }
]

let result;
```
<br>

#### 1) Count the numbers of items

```js
result = people.reduce((acc, person) => acc + 1, 0);

console.log(result);  // 3
```
<br>

#### 2) Sum all ages
```js
result = people.reduce((acc, person) => acc + person.age, 0);

console.log(result);  // 93
```
<br>

#### 3) Print the array of names (map)
To add new elements in the array, I can use the spread syntax(`...`).
```js
result = people.reduce((acc, person) => 
[...acc, person.name] , []);

console.log(result);  // (3) ['Leigh', 'Jenny', 'Heather']
```
<br>

#### 4) Convert to id => person lookup (dict)
In this case, I want to make an array of objects that has id: info as a key: value pair. This will make the searching easier. It's more efficient than looping all through the array.

```js
result = people.reduce((acc, person) => {
  return {...acc, [person.id]: person}
}, {})

console.log(result);
/* {1: {id: '1', name: 'Leigh', age: 35}, 
2: {id: '2', name: 'Jenny', age: 30}, 
3: {id: '3', name: 'Heather', age: 28}} */

console.log(result['2']);
// 2: {id: '2', name: 'Jenny', age: 30}
```
<br>

#### 5) Print out the max age
Before, I would make a new array of number values using `map()`, then use `Math.max()` to get the maximum number. Using `reduce()` is much efficient than that. For the initial value, `null` is used instead of 0. It's because the numbers could be negative values, in which 0 would be the maximum.<br>

```js
result = people.reduce((acc, person) => {
  if (acc === null || acc < person.age) 
    return person.age;
  return acc;
}, null)

console.log(result);  // 35
```
If the value hasn't settled(`acc === null`) or if the current value is larger than the value in the accumulator(`acc < person.age`), it will return the current value(`person.age`). If not, the previous value(`acc`) will be returned.

<br>

#### 6) Print out the min age
```js
result = people.reduce((acc, person) => {
  if (acc === null || acc > person.age) return person.age;
  return acc;
}, null)

console.log(result);
```
<br>

#### 7) Find an item by name (find)

```js
result = people.reduce((acc, person) => {
  if (acc != null) return acc;
  // I haven't found the right person yet
  if (person.name === "Leigh") return person;
  // keep looking(going back to line 1)
  return null;
}, null)

console.log(result);
// {id: '1', name: 'Leigh', age: 35}
```
① `if (acc != null)` is to check if I already found someone.<br>
+ `acc != null` means that I already found someone. It will return `acc`, which is the person's info(the element).

+ If I haven't found the person from the previous loop (if `acc` is `null`), the code will get to the next line.
<br>

② `if(person.name === "Leigh")` checks if the current value is the person I'm looking for("Leigh" in this case).
+ If the person is the one I'm looking for, it returns that person's info(the element). 
<br>

+ If not, the code will get to the next line, return `null` (it'll keep looking) and go back to ① for the next loop. If a person is not found, the result would be `null`.

<br>

#### 8) Check if all are over 18 (every)
```js
result = people.reduce((acc, person) => {
  if (!acc) 
    return false;
  return person.age > 18;
}, true)

console.log(result);  // true
```
In this case, the initial value is set to `true`. I first assume all are over 18 unless I find one that isn't, in which case I'll flip the value over to `false`.<br>

① Starting the loop, `acc` is set to `true`. `!acc` is false, so the code will get to the next line and return the Boolean value of `person.age < 18`.<br>

② Check if at least one person is under 18

+ If a person is under 18, `false` would be returned at the end of the loop. Starting a new loop, the condition `!acc` is true and the reducer will return `false`. It means that there are at least one person under 18.
<br>

+ If the person is over 18, `true` would be returned and the code will get to the next loop. 

<br>

#### 9) Check if any over 18 (some)
```js
result = people.reduce((acc, person) => {
  if (acc) return true;
  return person.age > 18;
}, false)
```
In this case, the initial value is set to `false`. I first assume all are not over 18. As soon as I find someone over 18, I'll flip the value over to `true`. The initial value is set to `false`, so I have to set the condition `acc` to check if anyone is over 18.
<br>

+ **Things to notice**

`reduce()` loops through the whole array, so I have to consider how the very first loop and the end of the previous loop would be like. Especially when putting some logic(if) in the code. The callback function doesn't end just executed once. One more, the code inside `if` is executed only if the condition inside its parentheses is `true`.
<br>

---

```js
const orders = [
  { id: "1", status : "pending" }, 
  { id: "2", status : "pending" }, 
  { id: "3", status : "cancelled" }, 
  { id: "4", status : "shipped" }
];
```
<br>

#### 10) Count occurences
In this case, I want to make an array of objects that has status: times as a key: value pair.

```js
result = orders.reduce((acc, order) => {
  return {...acc, [order.status]: (acc[order.status] || 0) + 1 };
}, {})

console.log(result);
// {pending: 2, cancelled: 1, shipped: 1}
```
The value will be (whatever it was before) + 1. If I have that status before, it'll take existing value(`acc[order.status]`) and add 1 to that value. `acc[order.index]` will return the times value from the `acc`. If I see the status for the first time, the value will be initialized to 0.
<br>

---

```js
const folders = [
  "index.js",
  ["flatten.js", "map.js"],
  ["any.js", ["all.js", "count.js"]]
];
```
<br>

#### 11) Flatten an array when dealing with nested data structures

I can think of `folders` array as a folder that has a file or another folder that contains another files. In this case, I want to get a single array of only files.

```js
function flatten(acc, item) {
  if (Array.isArray(item)) {
    return [...acc, ...item.reduce(flatten, [])];
  }
  return [...acc, item];
}

result = folders.reduce(flatten, []);

console.log(result);
// (6) ['index.js', 'flatten.js', 'map.js', 'any.js', 'all.js', 'count.js']
```
In this case, a function to be called recursively is needed. The `folders` array will be reduced with `flatten` function. The function gets two parameters: `acc` and `item`(the current value). As I can see, `item` could be a string or an array. 
<br>

The `if` condition checks whether the item is an array or not.<br>

+ If an item is a string, `Array.isArray(item)` is `false`, and the code will get to the next line. It will just add the item to `acc`.
<br>

+ If an item is an array, `Array.isArray(item)` is `true`, the function recursively calls itself and flattens all of its children. Then the elements of the array will be expanded by spread syntax(`...`) and added to the array.

<br>

The function can be simplified as below.
```js
function flatten(acc, item) {
  if (Array.isArray(item)) {
    return item.reduce(flatten, acc);
  }
  return [...acc, item];
}

result = folders.reduce(flatten, []);

console.log(result);
// (6) ['index.js', 'flatten.js', 'map.js', 'any.js', 'all.js', 'count.js']
```
It uses the same function, but this time the starting value is whatever I'm currently at(`acc`). This way I can shorten the code.

<br>

#### 12) Create reduce myself (instead of using reduce)
```js
function reduce(array, callback, initial) {
  let acc = initial;
  for (let i = 0; i < array.length; i++) { 
    acc = callback(acc, array[i], i, array)
  }
  return acc;
}

result = reduce([1, 2, 3], (acc, num) => acc + num, 0);
console.log(result);  // 6
```
I can make a reduce function, which does the same job as `reduce()` method. The function gets three parameters: the array, the callback function, and the initial value.<br>

First, I create a variable to store the accumulator and initialize the value. It works just like `acc`. Then, I use `for loop` to actually loop through all the elements in the array. While looping, the accumulator is updated(or replaced) to whatever the callback returns.<br>

The callback function expects to receive the current accumulator, current element that I'm iterating over(array at the index), current index(optional), and the entire array(optional). After the loop, the function returns `acc` value.<br>

On the upper code, the array is `[1, 2, 3]`, the callback function is `(acc, num) => acc + num`, and the initial value is 0. The elements of the array will be added through the for loop. 
<br>

---

In the case of find(7), every(8), any(9), `reduce()` can be efficient in that I can actually stop the loop. If I get a value that I'm looking for, there's no point to continue iterating the rest of the array.

<br>





[1]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g1C40tDP0Bk
[2]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NiLUGy1Mh4U
[3]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Spread_syntax