---
title: "Mximiazing Privacy and Security with iCloud's Advanced Data Protection"
categories: [privacy,security,apple]
---

Last week, Apple [released](https://www.phonearena.com/news/apple-ios-16.2-advanced-data-protection-available-now_id144262) Advanced Data Protection, a new way to fully encrypt iCloud data end-to-end (E2EE). This means that your account data is so secure that not even Apple can read it, providing an extra layer of privacy by reducing the data that Apple knows about you and what is accessible through government requests and warrants.

However, it's important to note that this feature is optional and comes with warnings for a reason. Choosing to secure your data in this way means that you are solely responsible for recovering your account if you lose access. While setting up Advanced Data Protection is relatively straightforward, making your account easy to recover is not.

To protect your data using an iPhone, the first step is to ensure that your trusted devices are compatible with Advanced Data Protection. This means that they must be running the latest software, such as iOS 16.2. If you have an older device, like a 2015 MacBook Pro, that isn't compatible with the latest software version, it may not be able to connect to your iCloud account at all. This can be a dealbreaker for some people, but it's important to consider the trade-off between the added security of Advanced Data Protection and the potential loss of access to older devices.

In my case, I had to remove my seven-year-old MacBook Pro from my iCloud account because it wasn't compatible with the latest software. While it was a sad realization that this feature isn't backwards compatible, I saw it as a small price to pay since my MacBook Pro isn't my primary computer anyway. I turned it on one last time to sync my photos and then disconnected it from my iCloud account.

If Advanced Data Protection doesn't work with older Apple devices, does that mean that Windows devices are doomed as well? Not entirely. Apple has released iCloud for Windows (Version 14) on the Microsoft store, which allows you to sync photos, contacts, and passwords to your PC with Advanced Data Protection enabled. However, the implementation is incomplete - for some reason, the PC won't be able to receive verification codes. This means that while you have access to all of your iCloud data on a Windows device, you won't be able to generate the verification codes needed to access your account, which may encourage ecosystem lock-in by requiring Apple devices to receive Apple ID verification codes.

The next step in setting up Advanced Data Protection is to establish recovery methods. You have two options: a recovery contact and a 26-digit recovery key. You only need one method, but it's a good idea to have both. A recovery key allows you to get back into your account on your own, but you'll need to keep it in a secure place since it can be used to access your data. A recovery contact can generate a verification code for you to get back into your account. Both of these options have trade-offs and risks. Recovery contacts are a convenient feature, but they could be vulnerable to social engineering attacks or unavailable to reach. If your recovery contact is with you and both of your phones are stolen, it could be difficult to access your account. It's important to keep your recovery contact a secret and to have a high level of trust in them, but Apple has also taken measures to prevent account takeovers by recovery contacts. To recover an account, you may need to provide details such as one of the passwords used to lock your iPhone or Mac, and the recovery process isn't available if the iCloud account is currently in active use.
While it may be tempting to setup only a recovery contact and skip the more complicated recovery key method, I ran into a hiccup while adding a new MacBook to my account that provded the usefulness of not rely on just one recovery method. After I signed into my new MacBook, it already immediately started downloading data from my account. But then it required that I confirm my iPhone password. This passcode is required to unencrypt the my account data (that had already started downloading, anyways..) but more troubling is that my passcode wouldn’t work. I confirmed it was indeed accurate by typing the passcode into my iPhone. I was able to confirm my account through my recovery key. There wasn't an option to unlock with another device or a recovery contact.

On the other hand, the recovery key must be kept in a secure place, which can make it difficult to keep with you while traveling unless it's on a locked device that isn't signed into your iCloud account. This leads to a potential single point of failure: our phones. Unfortunately, due to the reliance on SMS as a verification option and the iPhone being a trusted device, if you lose or break your iPhone, the only way to access it is by verifying your identity with one of your trusted devices. However, if they were also lost or stolen, you'll have to recover your account. This is why it's important to set up recovery contacts and a recovery key. But what if you're traveling and can't reach your recovery contact and didn't bring your recovery key with you? Fortunately, your data is still secure, but it may be difficult to access until you can get a verification code from a trusted contact or access to your recovery key. In this case, having a smartwatch can be handy since the recovery code can be stored on it, and if it's an Apple Watch, it can also receive verification codes.

Once you've set up recovery methods and removed any incompatible devices from your account, you're ready to enable Advanced Data Protection. It's simple to enable, but safeguarding yourself from losing access to your iCloud account isn't. I recommend having three avenues of recovery in case you lose access to your iCloud account. One is the recovery contact. If you're unable to reach this person, I recommend storing your recovery key on a secure device that is always with you, such as a smartwatch or non-Apple device that you would take with you on your travels. However, this device could also be destroyed or stolen. The third failsafe for recovery is writing down the recovery key and storing it in a safe, preferably one that is fire and water proof. This way, you have multiple options for recovering your account should you lose access, and you can choose the one that works best for you based on your situation.
