---
title: "ZIO HTTP Tutorial: The REST of the Owl"
date: 2022-09-15
header:
  image: "https://res.cloudinary.com/riverwalk-software/image/upload/f_auto,q_auto,c_auto,g_auto,ar_4.0/vlfjqjardopi8yq2hjtd"
tags: [zio, zio-http]
excerpt: "How to set up an HTTP server with zio-http, the HTTP library in the ZIO ecosystem."
---

_This article is brought to you by
[Mark Rudolph](https://github.com/alterationx10) - his second contribution to Rock the JVM. Mark is a senior developer, who has been working with Scala for a number of years. He also has been diving into the ZIO ecosystem, and loves sharing his learnings._

>_If you want to learn more about the core ZIO library, check out the [ZIO course](https://rockthejvm.com/p/zio)._

If you want the video version, check below:

{% include video id="i__kKmwhUI4" provider="youtube" %}

## Outline

In this post, we're going to go over an introduction to the zio-http library,
and take a look at some of the basic utilities it provides to get you up and
running.

By the end, we'll cover

- basic routing
- built-in and custom middleware
- response streaming
- websockets

## Set Up

This discussion will be based off of the latest ZIO HTTP code that supports ZIO
2.0, which is an RC at the time of this writing (September 2022). The
following dependencies are used:

```scala
val commonDependencies = Seq(
  "io.d11" %% "zhttp" % "2.0.0-RC11",
)
```

There is [code repository](https://github.com/alterationx10/the-rest-of-the-owl)
to along with this post, if you care to take a look at the code in your IDE.

Going forward, I will reference the library as `zhttp`.

## Absolute Basics

We're going to start off by discussing some of the basic concepts of `zhttp`,
all based off of a fairly unassuming, self-contained program:

```scala
package com.alterationx10.troto

import zhttp.http._
import zhttp.service.Server
import zio._

object OwlServer extends ZIOAppDefault {

  val port: Int = 9000

  val app: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] = Http.collect[Request] {
    case Method.GET -> !! / "owls" => Response.text("Hoot!")
  }

  val zApp: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] =
    Http.collectZIO[Request] { case Method.POST -> !! / "owls" =>
      Random.nextIntBetween(3, 6).map(n => Response.text("Hoot! " * n))
    }

  val combined: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] = app ++ zApp

  val program: ZIO[Any, Throwable, ExitCode] = for {
    _ <- Console.printLine(s"Starting server on http://localhost:$port")
    _ <- Server.start(port, combined)
  } yield ExitCode.success

  override def run: ZIO[Any with ZIOAppArgs with Scope, Any, Any] =
    program
}
```

### Request => Response

In `zhttp`, `Request`s are processed into `Response`s via implementations of a
`sealed trait Http[-R, +E, -A, +B]`, which itself
`extends (A => ZIO[R, Option[E], B])`. From the latter, we can quickly infer
that `R` and `E` are the _resource_ and _Error_ channels of a `ZIO` effect, and
we're going to be converting an `A` to a `B` effectually.

There are some included type aliases to shorten this signature, however in this
article we will try to stick to the full version. Also, note, that due to the
first type alias, the official documentation tends to often refer to their code
examples as an "http app" or "app" - this jargon might leak into this post as
well.

```scala
type HttpApp[-R, +E] = Http[R, E, Request, Response]
type UHttpApp        = HttpApp[Any, Nothing]
type RHttpApp[-R]    = HttpApp[R, Throwable]
type UHttp[-A, +B]   = Http[Any, Nothing, A, B]
```

As a quick note, this section will have `R` as `Any` and `E` as `Nothing`. We
will discuss including resources, and error handling later in the article.

Let's take a moment to dig into our first endpoint:

```scala
  val app: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] = Http.collect[Request] {
    case Method.GET -> !! / "owls" => Response.text("Hoot!")
  }
```

We will use `A` and `B` here, knowing that above `A = Request` and
`B = Response`. `Http.collect[A]` is a `PartialCollect[A]` - which behaves like
a PartialFunction, meaning we're going to pattern match on something relating to
`A` and return a `B`.

We're matching against a `Request`, so let's look closer at the `case` statement
above. The tricky syntax is the infixed `->` operator, so let's first look to
the immediate _right_ of it: `!! / "owls"`. This is a `Path`, and `!!` denotes
the root of the path (i.e. "/" - not to be confused with the `PathSyntax`
operator `/`). On the _left_ of `->` is `Method.GET` - a `Method`. What `->`
does, is tuple2 together the things on the left/right of it. The definition is

```scala
@inline def -> [B](y: B): (A, B) = (self, y)
```

In our case

```scala
case Method.GET -> !! / "owls" => Response.text("Hoot!")
```

and

```scala
case (Method.GET, !! / "owls") => Response.text("Hoot!")
```

should behave identically. So what's going on, is we are looking at a `Request`
value, and matching on it's `Method` and `Path` - if they match, we will return
our `Response`.

It will be important for later, but we can reference the request `req` in our
response, for example, via something like

```scala
case req @ Method.GET -> !! / "owls" => Response.text("Hoot!")
```

As a quick aside, `Http.collect` also internally lifts these to `Option`s, so it
can handle the case of `None` when nothing may match.

A `Method` models an HTTP request method, i.e. `GET`, `POST`, `DELETE`, etc...

A `Path` models an HTTP request path. Let's take a moment to briefly outline
`!!`, `/`, and `/:`.

As mentioned above, `!!` represents the a path root, i.e. a "/".

`/` is a path delimiter that starts extraction of the left-hand side (a left
associative operator).

`/:` is a path delimiter that starts extraction of the right-hand side (a right
associative operator), and can match paths partially. For example, if we look at
the code below:

```scala
case Method.GET -> "" /: "owls" /: name  => Response.text(s"$name says: Hoot!")
```

and if we took to `curl`:

```shell
➜ the-rest-of-the-owl (main) ✗ curl http://localhost:9000/owls
Hoot!%
➜ the-rest-of-the-owl (main) ✗ curl http://localhost:9000/owls/Hooty
Hooty says: Hoot!%
➜ the-rest-of-the-owl (main) ✗ curl http://localhost:9000/owls/Hooty/The/Owl
Hooty/The/Owl says: Hoot!%
```

We can see in the second, and third case, we're partially matching the remaining
path, and it can capture more than just one segment representing a name!

As a further note, you can't use `/` and `/:` in the same case statement, as
left- and right-associative operators with same precedence may not be mixed.

### Composing many Http[-R, +E, -A, +B]

In our example, we also have:

```scala
  val zApp: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] =
    Http.collectZIO[Request] { case Method.POST -> !! / "owls" =>
      Random.nextIntBetween(3, 6).map(n => Response.text("Hoot! " * n))
    }
```

Note that `Http.collectZIO[Request]` behaves just like `Http.collect[Request]`,
except here instead of returning a `Response`, we'll return a
`ZIO[R, E, Response]`. Being ZIO users, it would make sense to see this form
heavily in an app that relies on our _resourceful_ logic. In the example above,
this endpoint will use the built-in `zio.Random` (which no longer needs to be
declared in the `R` channel, as we're using ZIO 2), and `Hoot` at us 3 to 5
times randomly, per request.

We then combine `app` and `zApp` to pass to the server:

```scala
  val combined: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] = app ++ zApp
```

There are four operators to compose these "HTTP applications": `++`, `<>`, `>>>`
and `<<<`, and the behavior of each is as described from the
[official documentation](https://zio.github.io/zio-http/docs/v1.x/dsl/http#composition-of-http-applications).

> ++ is an alias for defaultWith. While using ++, if the first HTTP application
> returns None the second HTTP application will be evaluated, ignoring the
> result from the first. If the first HTTP application is failing with a Some[E]
> the second HTTP application won't be evaluated.

> <> is an alias for orElse. While using <>, if the first HTTP application fails
> with Some[E], the second HTTP application will be evaluated, ignoring the
> result from the first. If the first HTTP application returns None, the second
> HTTP application won't be evaluated.

> `>>>` is an alias for andThen. It runs the first HTTP application and pipes
> the output into the other.

> `<<<` is the alias for compose. Compose is similar to andThen. It runs the
> second HTTP application and pipes the output to the first HTTP application.

## Server

At this pont, we have everything needed to start up an instance of our web
server:

```scala
  val program: ZIO[Any, Throwable, ExitCode] = for {
    _ <- Console.printLine(s"Starting server on http://localhost:$port")
    _ <- Server.start(port, combined)
  } yield ExitCode.success

  override def run: ZIO[Any with ZIOAppArgs with Scope, Any, Any] =
    program
```

This is a simple entry point, and we only need to give `Server.start` a port
(defined as `9000` above), and our _composed_ `Http[R, E, Request, Response]`.

Note that `Server.start` internally calls `ZIO.never`, and will block your
for-comprehension at that point. You should include it last, or append
`.forkDaemon`, and provide your own logic afterwards.

You can apply some configuration to the `Server` instance, however we won't
cover this in much capacity in this article. If interested, you can see the
official documentation
[here](https://zio.github.io/zio-http/docs/v1.x/dsl/server/) and
[here](https://zio.github.io/zio-http/docs/v1.x/examples/advanced-examples/advanced_server).

## Next Steps

At this stage, we've covered some `zhttp` basics, like pattern matching on a
requests method and path, to run the appropriate logic. Out next steps will be
about adding on extra functionality, like CRSF tokens and Authorization, via
Middleware.

### Middleware

Broadly, the definition of _middleware_ is context dependent; in our realm of
our discussion, if we're turning a `Request` into a `Response`, then it's
anything we do _in the middle_ of that process. It may be something behind the
scenes, like adding logging through the process, or more center-stage like
modifying the request to add headers to the request. Middleware is great at
helping de-couple/re-use business logic.

Specifically, in the context of `zhttp`, a `Middleware` is a transformation
function that converts _one_ `Http` to _another_.

```scala
type Middleware[R, E, AIn, BIn, AOut, BOut] = Http[R, E, AIn, BIn] => Http[R, E, AOut, BOut]
```

We _attach_ middleware to our `Http` via the `@@` operator. For example, we
could update our logic to use a built-in debug `Middleware` like so:

```scala
  val wrapped: Http[Console with Clock, IOException, Request, Response] =
    combined @@ Middleware.debug
```

and then, when running our application, we would see some debug messaging
printed when a client interacts with our server:

```shell
[info] Starting server on http://localhost:9000
[info] 200 GET /owls 9ms
```

In the next section, we will build our own Logging Middleware, and then look at
a few of the other built in ones.

### Logging

Our custom middleware is going to log some information about the `Request`
received, and the `Response` about to be sent back. We'll set up a new object
`Verbose` and define a method `log` that returns a new `Middleware`, in which we
will define the trait's `apply` method.

We will be able to do this with the `.mapZIO` and `.contramapZIO` functionality
of the `http` argument the `Middleware` takes in the `apply` method.

For an http of type `Http[R, E, A, B]`, the `A` is the type of input, and `B` is
the type of the output. In our example, `A = Request` and `B = Response`. If we
want to do something with the _input_, like printing all of the request headers,
we can use `.contramapZIO[R1, E1, Request]`:

```scala
http
    .contramapZIO[R1, E1, Request] { r =>
      for {
        _ <- ZIO.foreach(r.headers.toList) { h =>
                Console.printLine(s"> ${h._1}: ${h._2}")
              }
      } yield r
    }
```

and if we want to do something with the _output_, like printing all of the
response headers, we can use `.mapZIO[R1, E1, Response]`:

```scala
http
    .mapZIO[R1, E1, Response] { r =>
      for {
        _ <- Console.printLine(s"< ${r.status}")
        _ <- ZIO.foreach(r.headers.toList) { h =>
                Console.printLine(s"< ${h._1}: ${h._2}")
              }
      } yield r
    }
```

The complete example might look something like

```scala
package com.alterationx10.troto.middleware

import zhttp.http._
import zio._

object Verbose {

  def log[R, E >: Throwable]
      : Middleware[R, E, Request, Response, Request, Response] =
    new Middleware[R, E, Request, Response, Request, Response] {

      override def apply[R1 <: R, E1 >: E](
          http: Http[R1, E1, Request, Response]
      ): Http[R1, E1, Request, Response] =
        http
          .contramapZIO[R1, E1, Request] { r =>
            for {
              _ <- Console.printLine(s"> ${r.method} ${r.path} ${r.version}")
              _ <- ZIO.foreach(r.headers.toList) { h =>
                     Console.printLine(s"> ${h._1}: ${h._2}")
                   }
            } yield r
          }
          .mapZIO[R1, E1, Response] { r =>
            for {
              _ <- Console.printLine(s"< ${r.status}")
              _ <- ZIO.foreach(r.headers.toList) { h =>
                     Console.printLine(s"< ${h._1}: ${h._2}")
                   }
            } yield r
          }

    }

}
```

We're not modifying the input/output here, so the types remain the same and
their values un-altered. We used `.contramapZIO` to accesses the `Request`,
print some information about it, and then return the un-altered value. We then
did the same thing with `mapZIO` for the `Response`.

This is a very simple example, but is very illustrative of how you can easily
update the `Request`/`Response` values if desired, or even fail-fast if a
particular header is missing, or unverified.

We attach our custom `Middleware` just as before:

```scala
val wrapped: Http[Any,Throwable,Request,Response] =
    combined @@ Verbose.log
```

and if we run our server, and make a request via curl, in our console we should
see something like:

```shell
[info] Starting server on http://localhost:9001
[info] > POST /owls Http_1_1
[info] > Host: localhost:9001
[info] > User-Agent: curl/7.79.1
[info] > Accept: */*
[info] < Ok
[info] < content-type: text/plain
```

### CORS

CORS stands for _Cross-Origin Resource Sharing_. It is a mechanism to allow a
website to allow traffic from only certain origins. For example, if we had
`https:///my-site.com` without any CORS config, then someone at
`https://their-site` could load our images, content, etc (and we'd get billed
for the data usage). By applying a CORS configuration, we can make sure our
resources are loaded when the `Origin` header is set to `my-site.com`. Requests
trying to render from the other page would then get rejected!

In addition to this, CORS can help with verifying you can interact with the
server at all! Wouldn't it be nice to know you can't upload a 50mb png to a site
_before_ you sent the request? You can send a CORS (`OPTIONS`) _preflight
request_ that says "Hey, I'm from _this_ origin, and I would like to _POST_ you
a file with some _MIME type_ that's _this big_ at _this_ endpoint. We good?" And
if your pre-flight request succeeds, you know you can make the _actual_
request - but if it fails, you don't have to waste the time/traffic finding it
out.

Many browsers today will automatically try to make pre-flight queries when
content is being loaded from a domain different that the host being accessed,
and if there is no CORS policy returned from the server, then the resources
won't be loaded. This even means between `sub.my-domain.com` and
`sub2.my-domain.com`.

To use the built-in CORS, you need to instantiate a `CorsConfig` such as:

```scala
  val config: CorsConfig =
    CorsConfig(
      anyOrigin = false,
      anyMethod = false,
      allowedOrigins = s => s.equals("localhost"),
      allowedMethods = Some(Set(Method.GET, Method.POST))
    )
```

and provide it as an argument via `@@ Middleware.cors(config)`.

If we look at the output of an example using the above config, we can see that
if we send an `Origin` header that doesn't match our config's `allowedOrigins`,
no CORS headers are returned - thus a browser would block the request. This
would be the same as if we sent no `Origin` header.

```shell
➜ the-rest-of-the-owl (main) ✗ curl -v --header "Origin: somewhere"  http://localhost:9001/owls
*   Trying 127.0.0.1:9001...
* Connected to localhost (127.0.0.1) port 9001 (#0)
> GET /owls HTTP/1.1
> Host: localhost:9001
> User-Agent: curl/7.79.1
> Accept: */*
>
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< content-type: text/plain
< set-cookie: x-csrf-token=e9250e77-49a8-4b75-bac0-27307980afba
< content-length: 5
<
* Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
Hoot!%
```

If we make the request again, with a valid `Origin` header, we can see the CORS
`access-control-` headers are returned.

```shell
➜ the-rest-of-the-owl (main) ✗ curl -v --header "Origin: localhost"  http://localhost:9001/owls
*   Trying 127.0.0.1:9001...
* Connected to localhost (127.0.0.1) port 9001 (#0)
> GET /owls HTTP/1.1
> Host: localhost:9001
> User-Agent: curl/7.79.1
> Accept: */*
> Origin: localhost
>
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< content-type: text/plain
< set-cookie: x-csrf-token=d4f7ddc2-63a7-4b78-b99f-1f9b6d6a2d0e
< access-control-expose-headers: *
< access-control-allow-origin: localhost
< access-control-allow-methods: GET,POST
< access-control-allow-credentials: true
< content-length: 5
<
* Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
Hoot!%
```

Note that the `CorsConfig` case class has a lot of default values provided, and
it may be unintuitive at first:

```scala
object Cors {
  final case class CorsConfig(
    anyOrigin: Boolean = true,
    anyMethod: Boolean = true,
    allowCredentials: Boolean = true,
    allowedOrigins: String => Boolean = _ => false,
    allowedMethods: Option[Set[Method]] = None,
    allowedHeaders: Option[Set[String]] = Some(
      Set(HttpHeaderNames.CONTENT_TYPE.toString, HttpHeaderNames.AUTHORIZATION.toString, "*"),
    ),
    exposedHeaders: Option[Set[String]] = Some(Set("*")),
  )
}
```

For example, you might start with
`CorsConfig(allowedOrigins = _ == "myhost.com")`, but the `anyOrigin` value is
defaulted to `true`.

### CSRF

CSRF stands for _Cross-Site Request Forgery_. At a broad level, this is when
some _nefarious code_ tries to trick you into performing an action with your
_already logged in_ credentials. For example, let's say you were logged into a
popular online store, and a browser plugin went rouge. Opening the plugin takes
you to a link that _actually_ triggers an email change for your account with the
store via a hidden form - which your browser happily send along your sessions
information, giving a chance for an attacker to take over your account. CSRF
tries to help stop/lessen that attack vector.

CSRF involves the generation of a fairly secure/unique string (we'll call it a
`token`), and submitting it back to our trusted site when we send information,
as an extra level of verification that it was intentionally sent by the user.

A popular way to do this is called _Double Submit Cookie_. This means that a
secure http-only (i.e. browser javascript cannot access this!) cookie is set
with the value of the `token`, and any routes you want protected will need to
_both_ send this cookie, _as well as_ the `token` as a parameter. You could
imagine that a trusted web page that is rendered with form submissions already
have this value on a hidden input pre-filled and sets a cookie. When the form is
submitted, the cookie will go along with the values, and the back-end server can
verify that they are preset _and_ match! From here, you can also take it a step
further and encrypt the cookie, so the back-end can verify that it can decrypt
the `token` as well to ensure authenticity.

`zhttp` includes `Middleware.csrfGenerate()` and `Middleware.csrfValidate()` as
built-in options. For our example, we'll split these and add the `csrfGenerate`
to out `Http` that has the `GET` routes, and the `csrfValidate` to our `POST`:

```scala
  val app: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] = Http.collect[Request] {
    case Method.GET -> !! / "owls"          => Response.text("Hoot!")
    case Method.GET -> "owls" /: name /: !! =>
      Response.text(s"$name says: Hoot!")
  } @@ Middleware.csrfGenerate()

  val zApp: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] =
    Http.collectZIO[Request] { case Method.POST -> !! / "owls" =>
      Random.nextIntBetween(3, 6).map(n => Response.text("Hoot! " * n))
    } @@ Middleware.csrfValidate()
```

Let's interact and inspect with these endpoint via curl:

```shell
➜ ~ curl -X GET -v http://localhost:9001/owls
Note: Unnecessary use of -X or --request, GET is already inferred.
*   Trying 127.0.0.1:9001...
* Connected to localhost (127.0.0.1) port 9001 (#0)
> GET /owls HTTP/1.1
> Host: localhost:9001
> User-Agent: curl/7.79.1
> Accept: */*
>
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< content-type: text/plain
< set-cookie: x-csrf-token=2075bc8b-c64b-494c-8249-c3a87ca72fcd
< content-length: 5
<
* Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
Hoot!%
```

We made a `GET` request, and we can see that the server told us to set a cookie
with our `x-csrf-token`.

If we try to access our `POST` without the `token`, we will get a
`403 Forbidden`!

```shell
➜ ~ curl -X POST -v http://localhost:9001/owls
*   Trying 127.0.0.1:9001...
* Connected to localhost (127.0.0.1) port 9001 (#0)
> POST /owls HTTP/1.1
> Host: localhost:9001
> User-Agent: curl/7.79.1
> Accept: */*
>
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 403 Forbidden
< content-length: 0
<
* Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
```

This middleware does use the _Double Submit Cookie_ method, so if we make a
`POST` including our `token` as a cookie, _and_ a corresponding header, then we
can obtain access to our endpoint.

```shell
➜ ~ curl -X POST -v --cookie "x-csrf-token=2075bc8b-c64b-494c-8249-c3a87ca72fcd" -H "x-csrf-token: 2075bc8b-c64b-494c-8249-c3a87ca72fcd" http://localhost:9001/owls
*   Trying 127.0.0.1:9001...
* Connected to localhost (127.0.0.1) port 9001 (#0)
> POST /owls HTTP/1.1
> Host: localhost:9001
> User-Agent: curl/7.79.1
> Accept: */*
> Cookie: x-csrf-token=2075bc8b-c64b-494c-8249-c3a87ca72fcd
> x-csrf-token: 2075bc8b-c64b-494c-8249-c3a87ca72fcd
>
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< content-type: text/plain
< content-length: 18
<
* Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
Hoot! Hoot! Hoot! %
```

### Basic Auth

Basic auth is used for hiding a site behind a simple user/password check. The
credentials are _base64 encoded_, but not encrypted, so it shouldn't be used
except over https.

We'll add a _super secret_ route to our app using the built-in
` Middleware.basicAuth`.

```scala
  val authApp: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] = Http.collect[Request] {
    case Method.GET -> !! / "secret" / "owls" =>
      Response.text("The password is 'Hoot!'")
  } @@ Middleware.basicAuth("hooty", "tootie")
```

In our example, we use

```scala
final def basicAuth(u: String, p: String): HttpMiddleware[Any, Nothing]
```

which takes two parameters, a username and a password. When a request comes in,
and the credentials are present on the HTTP header, it will compare those values
to the username and password for validation. If you wanted to pass in your own
logic for this, you could use

```scala
case class Credentials(uname: String, upassword: String)
final def basicAuth(f: Credentials => Boolean): HttpMiddleware[Any, Nothing]
final def basicAuthZIO[R, E](f: Credentials => ZIO[R, E, Boolean]): HttpMiddleware[R, E]
```

We will not cover it in this article, however there are other helpful pre-made
`MiddleWare`, for bearer tokens and custom authorization:

```scala
final def bearerAuth(f: String => Boolean): HttpMiddleware[Any, Nothing]
final def bearerAuthZIO[R, E](f: String => ZIO[R, E, Boolean]): HttpMiddleware[R, E]
  final def customAuth(
    verify: Headers => Boolean,
    responseHeaders: Headers = Headers.empty,
    responseStatus: Status = Status.Unauthorized,
  ): HttpMiddleware[Any, Nothing]
  final def customAuthZIO[R, E](
    verify: Headers => ZIO[R, E, Boolean],
    responseHeaders: Headers = Headers.empty,
    responseStatus: Status = Status.Unauthorized,
  ): HttpMiddleware[R, E]
```

Looking back at out basic auth example, if we try to access our endpoint without
credentials, we'll get a 401 Unauthorized, and a polite `www-authenticate`
header indicating that we may be able to access it via `Basic` auth.

```shell
➜ ~ curl -v http://localhost:9001/secret/owls
*   Trying 127.0.0.1:9001...
* Connected to localhost (127.0.0.1) port 9001 (#0)
> GET /secret/owls HTTP/1.1
> Host: localhost:9001
> User-Agent: curl/7.79.1
> Accept: */*
>
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized
< www-authenticate: Basic
< content-length: 0
<
* Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
```

We'll use the power of curls `--user` flag to do the encoding for us this time:

```shell
➜ ~ curl -v --user hooty:tootie http://localhost:9001/secret/owls
*   Trying 127.0.0.1:9001...
* Connected to localhost (127.0.0.1) port 9001 (#0)
* Server auth using Basic with user 'hooty'
> GET /secret/owls HTTP/1.1
> Host: localhost:9001
> Authorization: Basic aG9vdHk6dG9vdGll
> User-Agent: curl/7.79.1
> Accept: */*
>
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< content-type: text/plain
< content-length: 23
<
* Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
The password is 'Hoot!'%
```

We can see that our `Authorization: Basic aG9vdHk6dG9vdGll` was sent in plain
text (base64 encoded), as well as that our request was successful.

### Juggling Middleware Priority

At this point, we've tacked on a few pieces of `Middleware`. Combining your
routes can be very tricky, so let's address some issues. Let's looks at what we
have so far:

```scala
  val app: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] = Http.collect[Request] {
    case Method.GET -> !! / "owls"          => Response.text("Hoot!")
    case Method.GET -> "owls" /: name /: !! =>
      Response.text(s"$name says: Hoot!")
  } @@ Middleware.csrfGenerate()

  val zApp: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] =
    Http.collectZIO[Request] { case Method.POST -> !! / "owls" =>
      Random.nextIntBetween(3, 6).map(n => Response.text("Hoot! " * n))
    } @@ Middleware.csrfValidate()

  val authApp: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] = Http.collect[Request] {
    case Method.GET -> !! / "secret" / "owls" =>
      Response.text("The password is 'Hoot!'")
  } @@ Middleware.basicAuth("hooty", "tootie")

  val combined: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] = app ++ authApp ++ zApp
```

We have to add `authApp` _before_ `zApp`, or our basic auth route won't be
available! _Why is that?_ It's because we aren't sending in any CSRF validation
tokens! Because we've added `Middleware.csrfValidate()` to `zApp`, that portion
_happily succeeds_ in handing us back a 403 Forbidden when we don't send the
CSRF data - thus if our `authApp` were _after_ it, we'd never reach it.

The same situation would occur if we added `authApp` to the front - everything
afterwards would also require basic auth. This also makes it not possible to
apply a _second_ `Middleware.basicAuth("hooty2", "tootie2")` at an `Http` passed
the first, because we'd always fail the credential validation at the first
middleware evaluation of the credentials (it would check for `user == hooty` and
`password == tootie`). The best we could do with basic auth is allow a set of
users/passwords that all have the same level of access to various protected
routes, _but not fine-grained individual access per route_.

## Extra Credit

Congratulations on making it this far! By now, we've set up a web server that's
returning content, and added basic levels of security like authorization, CSRF
tokens, and CORS policies 🎉 In the next, and final section, we will quickly
visit websocket support and response streaming.

### Websockets

Websockets are also created using `Http`, but instead of collecting `Request`s,
we typically collect `WebSocketChannelEvent`. Communication happens over the
channel, so instead of returning `Response` we will return `Unit`. At a lower
level, there is `Channel[A]`, which allows sending arbitrary messages of type
`A`.There is also`ChannelEvent`, which encapsulates the types of messages that
can be sent/received.

```scala
final case class ChannelEvent[-A, +B](channel: Channel[A], event: ChannelEvent.Event[B])
```

`WebSocketChannelEvent` is actually a type alias for
`ChannelEvent[WebsocketFrame, WebSocketFrame]`.

In our code example below, in addition to logging on some connections hooks, we
mainly return back the data sent from the user, but formatted differently. You
could further pattern match on the incoming message to perform different actions
based on the incoming payload - our bundled multiple `Http`s with different
endpoints to handle different functionality.

```scala
  val sarcastically: String => String =
    txt =>
      txt.toList.zipWithIndex.map { case (c, i) =>
        if (i % 2 == 0) c.toUpper else c.toLower
      }.mkString

  val wsLogic: Http[Any, Throwable, WebSocketChannelEvent, Unit] =
    Http.collectZIO[WebSocketChannelEvent] {

      case ChannelEvent(ch, ChannelRead(WebSocketFrame.Text(msg))) =>
        ch.writeAndFlush(WebSocketFrame.text(sarcastically(msg)))

      case ChannelEvent(ch, UserEventTriggered(event)) =>
        event match {
          case HandshakeComplete => ZIO.logInfo("Connection started!")
          case HandshakeTimeout  => ZIO.logInfo("Connection failed!")
        }

      case ChannelEvent(ch, ChannelUnregistered) =>
        ZIO.logInfo("Connection closed!")

    }
```

```scala
  val wsApp: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] = Http.collectZIO[Request] {
    case Method.GET -> !! / "ws" => wsLogic.toSocketApp.toResponse
  }
```

We will use a handy cli tool called `websocat` to test our websockets. It will
allow us to connect to our server, send messages, and see the responses that
come back.

```shell
➜ ~ websocat ws://localhost:9002/ws
Hello
HeLlO
Sarcasm is hard to convey on the internet
SaRcAsM Is hArD To cOnVeY On tHe iNtErNeT
```

### Streaming

Streaming responses is handled via `ZStream`, and works straight forwardly, if
you are comfortable with that topic. If you would like to dig into `ZStream`s a
bit further, I suggest you check out this
[article](https://blog.rockthejvm.com/zio-streams/).

In our example below, we take a `String` sentence, and repeat it 1000 times to
bulk it up a bit, being sure to use the `HTTP_CHARSET` encoding when we create a
`Chunk` for it. At this point, it's as easy as
`HttpData.fromStream(ZStream.fromChunk(data))`! Anything you can
`ZStream.from...` is fair game to stream, which is fairly powerful.

```scala
  val content: String =
    "All work and no Play Framework makes Jack a dull boy\n" * 1000

  val data: Chunk[Byte] = Chunk.fromArray(content.getBytes(HTTP_CHARSET))

  val stream: Http[Any, Nothing, Request, Response] = Http.collect[Request] {
    case Method.GET -> !! / "stream" =>
      Response(
        status = Status.Ok,
        headers = Headers.contentLength(data.length.toLong),
        data = HttpData.fromStream(ZStream.fromChunk(data))
      )
  }
```

## Wrapping Up

Hopefully, after reading this introduction, you feel comfortable enough to spin
up your own web server with zio-http, start adding on built in security
features - as well as custom middleware logic, and delve into high performance
via streaming responses and real-time communication via websockets.
