---
layout: single
title:  "30 Days Of JavaScript.3"
---

# Day 3. Booleans, Operators, Date

> On `day 3`, I learned booleans, undefined, null from primitive data types, along with various operators, operator precendence, window methods, and date objects. It was fun learning these. Let's start!


# Exercise
## Level 1.
6) Figure out the result of the following expressions first without using console.log(). After you decide the result confirm it by using console.log().
xi. There is no 'on' in both dragon and python

```js
console.log(!('dragon'.includes('on')) && !('python'.includes('on'))); //false
```
> I don't have to use two lines for comparing two words, I can just use ampersand operator(&&). Notice the negation operator(!) or 'no' in 'both'.

## Level 2.
**2. Prompt a user to enter side a, b, c of the triangle & calculate the perimeter(a+b+c) of triangle.**
```js
let sideA = prompt('Enter side A');
let sideB = prompt('Enter side B');
let sideC = prompt('Enter side C');
let perimeter = sideA +  sideB + sideC;
console.log('The perimeter of the triangle is ${perimeter}.);
```
> I typed 5, 4, 3 for each sides. The code seemed OK, but the result was 543, not 12. I searched google and found out that *prompt always returns a string.* I learned how to change data types(casting) on [Day 2][1].
```js
let perimeter = Number(sideA) + Number(sideB) + Number(sideC);
```

**5) Calculate the slope, x-intercept and y-intercept of y = 2x -2**
> To calculate the x-intercept I should plug in 0 for y and solve for x. To calculate the y-intercept I should plug in 0 for x and solve for y. 

<br>

**6) Slope is m = (y2-y1)/(x2-x1). Find the slope between point (2, 2) and point(6,10)**
> I wanted to make out a fancy expression, but I just did the plain calculation. You're free to leave any comment about the code.
```js
console.log((2-6)/(2-10));  //2
```

**8) Calculate the value of y (y = x2 + 6x + 9). Try to use different x values and figure out at what x value y is 0.**
> Not sure about this either...




[1]: https://yendoz.github.io/js2/ "30 Days Of JavaScript.2"