
## 1. Applications

#### App Manager
Shows ==all your connected apps== and Salesforce apps.

## 2. Home Page

#### Home Page
==Versatile canvas== for brining relevant updates, details, and summaries to your users with Lightning components.

## 3. Tabs and List Views
#listiview
Benefits of ==List Views==
- Save list views for future use.
- Filter on a specific field or fields.
- Search the field data in list views.
- specify which groups of users have access to the list view.
- Display as grid, Kanban, or split view. Select to display a relevant chart.


## 4. Page Layouts

Want more user friendly UI?
#### Page Layout
Controls the fields, sections, related lists, and buttons that appear when users view or edit a record.

###### Two ways to edit:
App Builder or via ==Edit Page== - structure
==Page Layout Editor== via the Object Manager - detailed

###### Dynamic Forms
You can migrate the ==fields== and ==sections== from your page layout as individual ==components== into the Lightning App Builder.
#component


## 5. Buttons, Links and Actions

###### Actions
Quick Actions allow users to ==create records, update records, log calls, and more.==

## 6. Record Types, Business Process, Path


###### Record Type
==Record types== allow you to offer users ==different page layouts and picklist values== for ==different business scenarios==, based on their profiles.

###### Creating a Record Type
Object Manager | Account > Record Types -> new

###### Creating Business Processes
Must define your required business processes **before creating record types** for opportunities, cases, solutions, or leads.

###### Creating a Path
Path guides your users along the steps in a process. 
Give users step-specific guidance(tips, links, company policy)