
## 1. Report Components

### Reports
<span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">Lists</span> or <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">summaries</span> that allow you to <span style="color:rgb(0, 112, 192)">aggregate</span> and <span style="color:rgb(0, 112, 192)">analyze</span> data in different ways.
<span style="color:rgb(0, 112, 192)">Access</span> to <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">report</span> and <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">dashboard</span> is controller through <span style="color:rgb(0, 176, 80)">folders</span>.

### Report Component Overview
1. Report Type: What <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">object</span> and related objects do you want to report on?
2. Scope: <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">Whose</span> records do you want to see and for <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">what time frame</span>?
3. Columns: What columns do you want to see?
4. Grouping: Which <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">field(s)</span> do you want to group by?
5. Summaries: Which numerical <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">field(s)</span> do you want to display as group <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">subtotals</span> and <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">grand totals</span>?
6. Filters: What additional filters do you want to <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">limit</span> the records you see?
7. Highlights/Charts: Do you want to <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">display</span> <span style="color:rgb(0, 112, 192)">summarized data</span> with highlights or as charts?
   
### Standard Report Types
Available by default for building reports on standard and custom objects and their related objects.

*Standard Report Types, but can be used to build reports on both on standard and CUSTOM OBJECTS?  
Let's say you created a custom object called Project__c and linked it to the Account object using a look up relationship. In this case, Salesforce automatically create "Standard Report Type, Accounts with Project__c.*

### Custom Report Type
ex. Account with or without Partners  
Standard Report Type only shows Accounts that have Partners. But with a Custom Report Type, you can include all Accounts, regardless of whether they have Partners or not. accounts.

### Report Formats
#### Tabular
It's a <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">table</span>, ordered set of fields in columns, with each row representing a record.

#### Summary
Similar to tabular reports, but allow <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">grouping</span> rows of data, view <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">subtotals</span>. and create <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">charts</span>.
#### Matrix
Similar to summary reports but allow you to <span style="color:rgb(0, 112, 192)">group</span> and <span style="color:rgb(0, 112, 192)">summarize</span> data by <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">both rows and columns</span>.

#### Joined
<span style="color:rgb(0, 112, 192)">Combine</span> <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">multiple views</span>, or <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">blocks</span> of related information in a single report.   
Each block acts as its own "sub-report" with its own report type, fields, columns, sorting and filtering.
Useful when you want to view <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">multiple report</span> blocks side by side<span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)"> in a single view</span>.

### Report Grouping and Summaries
Report Groupings have implications for subtotals and grand totals in reports.

## 2. Filters and Formulas

### Report Filters and Filter Logic
Add up to 20 additional filters to a report.
Use filter logic to:   
- Link multiple filters using and, or, not operators
- Offset priority conditions using parentheses and nested parentheses.
  (괄호 및 중첩괄호를 사용하여 조건문의 우선순위 조절)

### Summary Formulas
Create <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">calculated summaries</span> of your numerical fields, in addition to the standard summaries.   
  
- Can reference formula fields, but not other summary formulas.

#### Row-Level Formulas
Writing a row-level formula adds a row-level formula column to your report that makes calculations <span style="color:rgb(192, 0, 0)">on every report row</span>.

## 3. Conditional Formatting and Charts

### Conditional Formatting
Set Conditional Formatting Rules to select custom ranges and colors for the metrics you want to track on summary or matrix reports.
  
- Report must contain at least one summary field or custom summary formula.


### Report Charts
Salesforce charts display summarized report data. You can adjust the chart type without making changes to the report itself.

## 4. Exports and Subscriptions

### Exporting Report Results
Export the report details to Excel.
- Creates a .csv, xlsx, .xls file
- Report charts will not export.
### Subscribe, Schedule and Send
- All email recipients must have access to the folder the report is saved in.
- Add conditions based on sum of the amount or record count in report to be notified.

## 5. Dashboards
A dashboard is a visual representation of data from multiple custom source reports.