## 1. Back Up Data

### 1) Data Backup Options
  
- **Reports** (small data, manual)
- **Data Loader/ Dataloader.io** (large volumes of data, manual or automated with scheduled jobs)
- **Data Export** (Best for long-term data retention and compliance, automated)

### 2) Managing Metadata
Important to have **a copy of your metadata** to fall back on in the event that you need to restore prior settings.
###### Native Tools for Managing Metadata
- ==Change Sets== : Copy metadata from production to a sandbox or from one sandbox to another sandbox. #followup
- Sandbox Refresh : By refreshing a related sandbox, your configuration metadata is copied over automatically.
- Force.com Migration Tool : command-line utility for moving metadata between a local directory and a Salesforce org.

## 2. Import, Export, Update Data

### 1) Data Import Wizard
#dataimportwizard
**Import** new records, **update** existing records or objects.   
*Can't export or delete data*
### 2) Data Loader 
#dataloader
###### Data Loader
Import/export ==bulk data==
More robust than the import wizard
*Can export or delete data*
###### Dataloader.io
100% cloud- based solution  
###### Matching New Information to Existing Records
When updating existing records, ensure that new data is being ==matched== to the correct record by using the ==Salesforce record ID==.

## 3. Mass Delete and Mass Transfer
### 1) Mass Delete Records
Allows you to delete standard object records that meet specific criteria.
The tool will alert you of any child records that would also be deleted.
###### Recycle Bin
Deleted records are stored in the recycle bin for a maximum of 15 days.
Located in the App Launcher.

###### Mass Transfer Tool
(when you hand over)
Used to **==transfer==** multiple accounts, leads, service contracts, and custom objects from one user to another.

## 4. Data Quality and Cleansing Tools

### 1) Field History Tracking
Enable history tracking on an object to ==track changes== on up to 20 standard or custom field on each object.  
Changes can be viewed on a record's ==History related list== or through ==History reports==.

### 2) Data Validation
Ensure the ==integrity of data== before it is saved by preventing users from saving invalid field values.   There are two types:  #datavalidation  
(데이터 유효성 검사. 잘못된 데이터가 시스템에 저장되는 것 방지)  

- System Data Validation
  Setting simple field properties to ensure valid data entry.
- Custom Validation Rules
  Use when you process complicated conditions.    
  Ex. Involving one or more fields, specific to your business process.
  
### 3) Manage Duplicate Leads 

Duplicate Leads Being created when...   
- A customer is submitted via **Web-to-lead marketing tool**   #followup #webtolead
  ex. in case of salesforce - submitted via account engagement tool 
- Private sharing model
###### Merge Duplicate Leads
1. Choose a lead record click View Duplicates.
2. Choose one lead record as the master and choose the field values that you want to keep.
###### Duplicate Management
Rules for Identifying Duplicates.
- Matching Rule : The matching ==criteria== to identify duplicate records.
- Duplicate Rule : When Salesforce engages matching rules and ==determines actions== to take as it encounters duplicates.   
  i.e. ==what to do== when a duplicate is found.
