---
title: "GHRS: Graph-based Hybrid Recommendation System with Application to Movie Recommendation"
---

### ABSTRACT
Research about recommender systems emerges over the last decade and comprises valuable services to increase different companies' revenue. While most existing recommender systems rely either on a content-based approach or a collaborative approach, there are hybrid approaches that can improve recoomendation system method using a graph-based model associated with the similarity of user's rating in combination with users' demographic and location information. By utilizing the advantages of Autoencoder feature extraction, we extract new features based on all combined attributes. Using the new set of features for clustering user, our proposed approach outperformed many existing recommendation algorithms on recommendation accuracy. Also, the method achieved significant results in the cold-start problem. All experiments have been performed on th MovieLens dataset due to the existence of users' side information.


### 1. Introduction
Recommendation Systems are a type of choice advisor to overcome the explosive growth of information on the web. These systems facilitate users with personalized items, which they are more likely to be interested in. RS have been employed to a wide variety of fields: movies, books, e-commerce, tourism, ect. An efficient RS may dramatically increase the number of sales of customers to boost business. In common, recommendations are generated based on user preference, item features, user-item interactions, and some othe information such as temporal and spatial data.
RS methods are mainly categorized into Collaborative Filtering, Content-Based Filtering, and hybrid recommender system based on the input data. CF models aim to exploit information about the rating history of users for items to provide a personalized recommendation. In this case, if someone rated a few items, CF relies on estimating the ratings he would have given to thousands of other items by using all the other users' rating. On the other side, CBF uses the user-item side information to esimate a new rating. For instance, user information can be age, gender, or occupation. Item information can be the movie genre, director, or the tages. CF is more applied than CBF because it only aims at the users' rating, while CBF requires advanced processing on items to perform well.
Although the CF model is preferred, it has some limitations. One of CF's limitations is known as the cold-start problem: how to recommend an item when any rating does not exist for either the user of the item? One idea to over come this issue is to build a hybrid model by combining CF and CBF, where side information can be utilized in the training process to compensate the lack of ratings through it. Some successful approaches extend the Probabilistic Matrix Factorization to integrate side information. However, some algorithms outperform them in the general case.
