---
title: "[Unix-Linux] Computers and Operating Systems"

categories:
  - Unix-Linux
tags:
  - [OS]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-05-17
last_modified_at: 2023-05-17
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Unix/Linux Operating Systems"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

# Kinds of Computer

Computers may be categorized based on purpose, function, usage, generations etc.

## Classification by purpose

- Microcomputers
  : - These are mainly for personal uses.
  : - Desktop, laptop, notebook, tablet computer, Arduino, raspberry pi, smart phones, gaming consoles.
- Minicomputers
  : - Used in small to medium business or laboratories.
  : - This term was used to distinguish between the micros and the main frame, today midrange computer is more commonly used.
- Mainframe computers
  : - Used by large organizations (governments and banks) for critical applications
  : - They are characterized by high stability and reliability.
  : - Able to run multiple different operating systems concurrently (virtualization)
- Supercomputers
  : - For weather forecasting, nuclear simulation, theoretical astrophysics, and complex scientific calculations

<br>

# What a computer?

- A device can be analog or digital.
  : Digital computers are easier to build.
- Also a device can be special purpose or general purpose.
  : A washing machine has a specialized computer.
- We will restrict our discussion to general purpose digital devices.
- A computer is a device that can take input, process it and produces an output.
- Most input devices (mouse, keyboards etc.) produces analog values, so it is converted to a digital value before the CPU can process it.
- The reverse is often done for the output i.e. digital values is converted into an analog and then sent to the output devices such as speakers and older monitors.
  : Newer device such as are able to handle digital signals.

<br>

# Operating System

- The operating system of the machine is responsible for managing all operations.
  : - Makes it easier for a user to use the hardware.
  : - Authenticating users.
  : - Scheduling and running system jobs.
  : - Performing user tasks.
  : - Allocate and Manage system resources (ram, cpu, storage,).
- There a 3 main operating systems:
  : - Microsoft Windows.
  : - Apple MacOS.
  : - Linux.
  : - Solaris (Sun Microsystems)
  : - Android (Linux in disguise)
- Microsoft OS’s have evolved from the primitive single-task, single-user system to the elaborate Window operating systems that we use today.
  : - The original MS-DOS could only run one console app at a time.
  : - &rarr; No support for fix disk, networking, multitasking or multiple user.
  : - &rarr; Gradually support was added until the latest Window is as capable as an industrial strength os.
- Linux was design to work like UNIX since inception
  : - Multi-user and multi-tasking
  : - It is only limited by hardware constraints like disk space, ram
  : - If runs your cell phone, the CERN reactor and even the rocket that will go to the moon.
- The first PC’s were stand-alone desktop. If you want to connect to another machine, you will have to patch the OS (network drivers) and have a special supervisor (server operating system) and hardware (modem or network interface card)
- Now it is ubiquitous for a device to be network capable. Network is built into the operating system to function both as a client and server. All current devices also have network interface cards most of the time even two of them (wired and wireless).

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
