---
title: "[Unix-Linux] File Management"

categories:
  - Unix-Linux
tags:
  - [File]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-05-17
last_modified_at: 2023-05-17
---

{% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the UNIX/LINUX Tutorial!

- Reference link: <https://www.tutorialspoint.com/unix/index.htm>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div>

<!-- 📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the UNIX/LINUX Tutorial!
{: .notice--danger} -->

<br>

# Three Basic Types of Files in Unix

- Ordinary Files
  : An ordinary file is a file on the system that contains data, text, or program instructions. In this tutorial, you look at working with ordinary files.
- Directories
  : Directories store both special and ordinary files. For users familiar with Windows or Mac OS, Unix directories are equivalent to folders.
- Special Files
  : Some special files provide access to hardware such as hard drives, CD-ROM drives, modems, and Ethernet adapters. Other special files are similar to aliases or shortcuts and enable you to access a single file using different names.

<br>

# File Management in Unix

All data in Unix is organized into files. All files are organized into directories. These directories are organized into a tree-like structure called the filesystem.

## Listing Files

List the files and directories stored in the current directory:

```
ls
```

Get more information about the listed files:

```
ls -l
```

## Metacharacters

- \* and ? are metacharacters.
- We use \* to match 0 or more characters, a question mark (?) matches with a single character.

Displays all the files, the names of which start with ch and end with .doc

```
ls ch*.doc
```

Display all the files ending with just .doc

```
ls *.doc
```

## Hidden Files

An invisible file is one, the first character of which is the dot or the period character (.). Unix programs (including the shell) use most of these files to store configuration information.

To list the invisible files, specify the -a option to ls

```
ls -a

.         .profile       docs     lib     test_results
..        .rhosts        hosts    pub     users
.emacs    bin            hw1      res.01  work
.exrc     ch07           hw2      res.02
.kshrc    ch07.bak       hw3      res.03
```

- .profile − The Bourne shell ( sh) initialization script
- .kshrc − The Korn shell ( ksh) initialization script
- .cshrc − The C shell ( csh) initialization script
- .rhosts − The remote shell configuration file
- Single dot (.) − This represents the current directory.
- Double dot (..) − This represents the parent directory.

## Creating Files

Use the vi editor to create ordinary files on any Unix system.

```
vi filename
```

The above command will open a file with the given filename. Now, press the key i to come into the edit mode. Once you are in the edit mode, you can start writing your content in the file as in the following program.

```
This is unix file....I created it for the first time.....
I'm going to save this content in this file.
```

Once you are done with the program, follow these steps −

- Press the key esc to come out of the edit mode.
- Press two keys Shift + ZZ together to come out of the file completely.

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
