---
title: "[Disc-Math] C.3 Modern Cryptography"

categories:
  - Disc-Math
tags:
  - [Cryptography]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-05-31
last_modified_at: 2023-05-31
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Math185-002 Discrete Mathematics"
{: .notice--danger}

<br>

# Overview of Course

## Topics

- Modern Cryptography (DHM, RSA)

## Weekly Learning Outcomes

- Find the residue.
- Find the key using the DHM scheme.
- Apply the RSA scheme in encryption and decryption.

<br>

# 5-ext. Modern Cryptography

Modern Cryptography

## Cryptography

Cryptography involves secret codes, ways of disguising information in order that a `sender` can transmit it to an intended `receiver` so that an `adversary` who somehow intercepts the transmission will be unable to detect its meaning.

- Converting a message to its disguised form is called `encrypting` (or the practice of `encryption`).
- Converting the message back to original form is called `decrypting` (or the practice of `decryption`).
- Basis of cryptography is some mathematical function, called the `encryption algorithm`. More advanced level of sophistication is to introduce a `key`, which is required to perform the algorithm properly.

<br>

## Cryptography Elements

At this point, we have two elements to do a reasonably sophisticated code:

1. A mathematical function.
2. Additional key that makes it possible to compute properly.

<br>

## Cryptography Problems

This raises problems when it comes to our adversary:

1. If the adversary gained knowledge of the encrypting function, its inverse could be derived and now any message intercepted could be easily decoded. Since the function would have to be known to both the sender and receiver, that exchange could be intercepted.
2. The key would have to be known to both sender and receiver. In exchanging that knowledge, its value could be intercepted. This became known as the `key exchange problem` or `key distribution problem`.

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
