---
title: "[Job] Interview Questions & Answers"

categories:
  - Job_Info
tags:
  - [Job, Developer]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-01-17
last_modified_at: 2023-01-17
---

{% capture notice-2 %}

📋 These are interview questions and answers for developer job!

- Reference tech news link: <https://passmyinterview.com/top-25-software-engineer-interview/>
- Reference tech news link: <https://www.mockquestions.com/position/Software+Developer/>
- Reference tech news link: <https://www.monster.com/career-advice/article/software-developer-interview-questions>
- Reference tech news link: <https://anywhere.epam.com/en/blog/software-developer-interview-questions-answers>
- Reference tech news link: <https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/interviewing/interview-questions-for-developers>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div>

<!-- 📋 These are interview questions and answers for developer job!
{: .notice--danger} -->

## Interview Questions & Answers

### 1. Tell me about yourself.

“Thank you for giving me the opportunity to be interviewed for this software engineer position with your organization today. After graduating from university with a degree in computer science, I worked for several organizations in various positions where I gained experience working on team projects, individual software engineering tasks, end-user testing, and new software applications. I would describe myself as an industrious, diligent, reliable, and forward-thinking software engineer who possesses the skills and qualities to match the job description. I have a track record of achievement and can be trusted to use critical thinking skills to solve complex organizational challenges and problems, to complete projects whilst adhering to strict organizational timeframes, and I always take ownership of my ongoing professional development. If you hire me as a software engineer, I will collaborate closely with other departmental members, and I will share my knowledge with the rest of my team to help the organization quickly achieve its strategic goals and maintain its position as an industry leader.”

### 2. Why did you decide to become a software engineer?

“I decided to become a Software Engineer because from a very early age I always had a passion and a genuine interest in all thing’s computers, software applications, and technical concepts. My favourite subjects at school involved computers, and I have a particular interest in the latest technological advancements. I also decided to become a software engineer because I thrive in situations where I have to solve problems and use critical thinking skills to achieve a specific outcome. I believe work is far easier and more enjoyable if you are genuinely passionate about what you do, and I hope my passion for software engineering is evident in my answers today during the interview and also in what I have included on my resume/CV.”

### 3. Can you describe a challenging software development project you recently completed and the results?

"The most challenging software project I've worked on recently involved an application to allow the company's personnel to self-manage their HR benefits. The challenge was that end-users had to have secure access to their own information without the HR staff intervening. This required me to implement several security features, including user authentication, password protection, and the ability for users to access the company's database behind its firewall via VPNs. Recognizing that I did not have recent experience in these technologies, I refreshed my skills by taking a short online course and collaborated with some of the other developers on our team on the project. Together we developed the software on schedule and under budget. I learned to recognize my shortcomings and bring in additional resources when needed."

### 4. What are some of the types of development projects you have worked on in your past positions?

"In my last two roles, I was focused on improving applications which manage transactions and interact with relational database systems. My role in the application development was developing all the code to control data queries, lookups, and indexing of the data. I worked with other programmers to design the interface, manage the backend database, and develop other application features. The companies I worked for were focused on e-commerce, conducting sales and other transactions via their websites."

### 5. I've heard applications referred to as both software and programs. Which terminology do you use, and how do these differ?

"It is common for people to confuse these terms. While they are similar, there are subtle differences between them. My definition of these terms is that a computer program is a set of code that executes specific tasks. This typically takes the form of an application. Computer software is any code that performs a function on a computing device. These can include the operating system, drivers, system software, APIs, applications, and other code. Computer software includes computer programs, but computer programs don't always include all the software. Computer Software is more machine-centric, while computer programs are more user-centric."

### 6. Why Did You Choose a Career in Software Development?

“I’ve always had a knack for solving problems and I feel that software does just that. I chose a career in software development because I find satisfaction in helping consumers, companies, and organizations find the solutions they need—from creating spreadsheets to designing skyscrapers. Additionally, I have experience with a variety of programming languages and enjoy working with them. For example, while I was in college, I helped a relative build a business website and web app. I also built human resources software at my prior job.”

### 7. What Programming Languages Are You Proficient In?

“I first learned how to use JavaScript, CSS, and HTML in college. Those were the languages I used the most when I helped a relative build a business site and web app. But as part of that project, I started learning how to use Python and PHP. In addition, I used C++ and Java to create HR software at my previous job. I found the C++ language to be the most flexible. In fact, it was the primary building block for the HR software I helped develop.”

### 8. Can You Describe the Steps Involved in Software Development?

“Initial planning and brainstorming are the first step in software development. During this stage, I determine the purpose and functionality of a program. The next step involves team analysis of the project, including the time frame and which tools and team members are needed. Then comes the design stage, where a program is designed by a team of software engineers before moving on to the development stage. Once in development, I step in to transform the design into functional software. It’s then shipped off to quality assurance to identify any defects or bugs. Lastly, the software is officially installed and launched.”

### 9. Tell Me About a Software Development Project You Completed Successfully.

“At my last job, where I worked for a software development firm, we developed HR software for a variety of companies. The biggest project I took part in was for a financial institution. The company’s original HR system was outdated and time consuming. We developed a new system where they could handle payroll, time tracking, attendance, training, and hiring in the same place. My primary role was coding, and I mostly worked with C++, Java, and Python. But I also took part in QA and testing. The final product helped the company streamline its HR processes and save time and money in the long run.”

### 10. How Do You Ensure Quality and Fix Errors?

“I usually launch code-based testing to identify and diagnose potential errors. When I helped test the HR software, I asked another member of the team peer review my code. They found one logical error that resulted in incorrect output. Once the coding error was corrected, I used Dynamic Testing to evaluate the software for functionality. By then, it appeared to work as projected.”

### 11. Can You Differentiate Between Functional and Object-Oriented Programming?

“Functional programming relies on mathematical functions, whereas object-oriented programming relies on classes of objects closely associated with functions. When utilizing functional programming, you must work solely with functions. Object-oriented programming, on the other hand, allows you to store functions within objects. Functional programming supports JavaScript, Python, Haskell, and Scala, while object-oriented programming supports Java, Python, C++, Perl, and Lisp.”

### 12. What type of development are you currently working on?

"I'm currently a developer for an e-commerce company. I build applications that help the company process customer orders and track payment and other customer information."

### 13. What tools do you use to keep track of project requirements?

"I typically use an online spreadsheet to track not only project requirements but also their deadlines. This lets me view the requirements no matter my location and in an organized format. It also lets me share the document with other members of my team, so everyone understands the project's requirements and deadlines."

### 14. What programming languages are you familiar with?

"I have experience with JavaScript, Python and C++. I'm also learning Swift via an online class and I'm always open to learning new languages to expand my skill set. As a developer, I think it's important to keep our skills up-to-date to contribute to our company's success and advance in our career."

### 15. Describe your ideal environment as a developer

"I do my best work in a quiet environment. Despite this, I enjoy working in a cross-functional team that fosters collaboration. I also prefer to work in an open-layout environment that allows me to communicate with my team members face-to-face. This helps me better understand any issues or concerns they have should they arise. Though I prefer communicating in person, I'm also well-versed in various communication technologies that help ease communication from afar."

### 16. Describe a conflict you had with a team member and how you resolved it

"In my most recent role, another developer and I disagreed with a project's direction. To resolve the matter, we met and discussed our opinions while letting each other speak. This allowed our conversation to flow more freely, and we were better able to understand where each other was coming from. Once we discussed our concerns, we came to a mutual agreement for the betterment of the project and our company."

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
