---
title: "[Assignment] 1. Computer Fundamentals"

categories:
  - Computer
tags:
  - [Computer]

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-01-22
last_modified_at: 2023-01-22
---

<!-- {% capture notice-2 %}

📋 This is the tech-news archives to help me keep track of what I am interested in!

- Reference tech news link: <https://thenextweb.com/news/blockchain-development-tech-career>
  {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div> -->

📋 This is my note-taking from what I learned in the class "Software Engineering Fundamentals - COMP 120-002"
{: .notice--danger}

## Lab 1

### Instructions

- Objective: Learn about computer peripherals and hardware.
- Describe computer components, include pictures
- Include header – student name and section, include page number in the footer
- Include cover page and page border
- Include 5 to 10 pages excluding the cover page and references
- Use Times New Romans, single spaced, and 12 size.
- Put the reference at the end of the document.
- Use APA for reference format.

### Question 1:

Describe computer components, include pictures

1. Computer architecture
2. CPU
3. IO devices
4. Memory
5. Memory units
6. Motherboard ports
7. Other latest devices (3 latest technologies)

### Question 2:

What is the best configuration when purchasing a new computer?

<br>

## Lab 2

### Instruction

- Objective: Learn about computer applications, OS and networking.
- Research the following topics. Include suitable diagrams.
- Include Page number in the footer.
- Include centennial college picture, student name and section in the header.
- Include cover page.
- Include 3 to 10 pages
- Use Times New Romans, single spaced, and 12 size.
- Put the reference at the end of the document.
- Use APA for reference format.

### Question:

Research the following topics. Include suitable diagrams.

1. Application software with examples
2. Systems software with examples
3. Explain operating systems with examples
4. Networking and its types (LAN, WAN, WLAN, MAN, SAN, PAN, EPN & VPN)

<br>

---

<br>

    🖋️ This is my self-taught blog! Feel free to let me know
    if there are some errors or wrong parts 😆

[Back to Top](#){: .btn .btn--primary }{: .align-right}
